# menneskelige-tanke: 826 Danish / 826 English paragraphs; 800 of 818 aligned one-to-one
# For each turn write a line in anchors-en.txt:  N|English words that begin page N (verbatim, 4-8 words)

=== p.2
DA: …elser. I den blotte Dvælen er Eftertanken Et med en Skuen, en blot Forestillen. Men en saadan Dvælen vil neppe ‖2‖ kunne vedvare længe i fuldstændigt hvilende Form. Uvilkaarligt vil der — maaske netop paa…
EN: …bring it forth anew, either to dwell once more on what was experienced, or to go through its various parts or properties or its relations to other experiences. In mere dwelling, reflection is one with a beholding, a mere representing. But such dwelling can scarcely persist for long in a wholly quiescent form. Involuntarily—perhaps precisely because of the interest that what is experienced holds—a movement of thought will be released, one that serves to bring out its inner and outer relations. Thus when the poet inv…

=== p.4
DA: …ælder naturligvis ogsaa, naar det er et og samme Emne, jeg undersøger i forskellig Sammenhæng og under forskel ‖4‖ lige Forhold; jeg sammenligner da de forskellige Maader, Emnet optræder paa i de forskelli…
EN: … I seek to determine its relation to something else, and the more relations of likeness and difference I find, the better I have thought it through. This holds of course also when it is one and the same object that I examine in different connections and under different conditions; I then compare the different ways in which the object appears in the different cases.…

=== p.5
DA: …ren, der skal finde et Synspunkt, ud fra hvilket det Stridende kan staa som Et, og for den praktisk Stræbende, ‖5‖ der skal underordne de stridende Tilskyndelser og Interesser under Tanken om et stort og l…
EN: …nflict, require a great energy if they are all to be taken up into the conscious connection of the mental life. This holds both for the inquirer, who must find a point of view from which the conflicting can stand as one, and for the practically striving person, who must subordinate the conflicting impulses and interests to the thought of a great and guiding purpose.…

=== p.6
DA: …Syntesen foregaar. Geniet og Villiesmennesket kunne i et Nu anvende en Energikapital, som andre Mennesker maa ‖6‖ fordele paa et længere Tidsrum. Paa Følelseslivets Omraade fremtræder denne Modsætning som…
EN: …ions—which might be said to form an analogy to what mass is in the case of physical energy—account must also be taken of the speed with which the synthesis proceeds. The genius and the man of will can in an instant expend a capital of energy that other people must distribute over a longer span of time. In the domain of the life of feeling, this opposition appears as an opposition between vehemence and inwardness, emotion and disposition, and analogous oppositions hold for the other sides of the mental life. In rese…

=== p.7
DA: …t Hjernearbejde, der svarer til det i det Foregaaende beskrevne aandelige Arbejde, kender man jo ikke direkte, ‖7‖ kun gennem selve det Aandsarbejde, til hvilket det antages at svare.…
EN: …easurement presupposes that one can, by purely psychological means, distinguish between more difficult and easier mental work; otherwise one moves in a circle. The brain-work corresponding to the mental work described above is, after all, not known directly, but only through the very mental work to which it is assumed to correspond.…

=== p.9
DA: …dige, for at vi praktisk kunne finde os til Rette i Livet. Og den analyserende Videnskab har ført Modsætningen ‖9‖ til det umiddelbart Givne videre, en Modsætning, allerede selve Sproget begunstiger ved at…
EN: …ut the immediate stream of the life of the spirit is, they maintain, the highest, and brings truth forth. The distinctions and definitions of thought are necessary in order that we may practically find our way in life. And analyzing science has carried the opposition to the immediately given still further—an opposition that language itself already favors, by forming independent words for the individual objects and by taking spatial relations as the basis for our intuitive images. It is as though a Fall had taken pl…

=== p.10
DA: …umiddelbart Givne fremtræde jo Ligheder og Forskelle, Sammenhæng og Mangfoldighed — og tillige, hvad der især ‖10‖ er af Betydning, en uvilkaarlig Stræben efter at bringe Harmoni tilstede mellem de forskel…
EN: …an bring about clarity concerning the relation between continuity and discontinuity, unity and multiplicity. And it is not anything wholly foreign that it brings in by its work; for already in the immediately given there appear, after all, likenesses and differences, connection and multiplicity—and likewise, what is especially significant, an involuntary striving to bring about harmony among the different tendencies. If there were not such an original striving, it would be unjustified to speak of a stream, of a con…

=== p.11
DA: …e paa det uvilkaarlige Sjæleliv, der danner det stadige Grundlag, af hvilket Eftertanken udspringer for derpaa ‖11‖ at gøre det selv til Emne for sin Virken. Vi maa gøre os fortrolige med, at det uvilkaarli…
EN: …eeking to become clear about its way of operating, we arrived at the concept of synthesis, and we then found that this concept could also be applied to the involuntary mental life, which forms the constant basis from which reflection springs, in order thereupon to make that basis itself an object of its activity. We must make ourselves familiar with the fact that the involuntary mental life, as it unfolds prior to the awakening of reflection, can be illuminated and designated only by way of analogy. We apprehend it…

=== p.12
DA: …, og dette Noget maa være en Mangfoldighed. De Emner, Eftertanken retter sig imod for at sammenholde og sammen ‖12‖ ligne dem, danne en sammenhængende Mangfoldighed; hvert enkelt Emne bliver til for os ved…
EN: …But now a new difficulty arises. Synthesis means combining—but there must then be something that is combined, and this something must be a multiplicity. The objects toward which reflection directs itself in order to hold them together and compare them form a coherent multiplicity; each individual object comes into being for us through an act of distinguishing. And in a single object we can again distinguish individual sides, properties, or parts, which we may call elements. The result seems then to…

=== p.13
DA: …rsaavidt det lykkes os at bevare Erindring om den Tilstand, vi ere i, naar Uvilkaarligheden raader, fremtræder ‖13‖ denne Tilstand — deri have den deskriptive Psykologis Mestre utvivlsomt Ret — ikke som et…
EN: …And insofar as we succeed in retaining a memory of the state we are in when involuntariness prevails, this state appears—and here the masters of descriptive psychology are undoubtedly right—not as a chaos of independent parts, but as a stream, a pulsation, yet not without differences, but such that there is a connection even between the lowest troughs and the highest crests of the…

=== p.14
DA: …l en ny Syntese, hvad enten dette nu betegner et Fremskridt, en mere værdifuld Tilstand, eller ikke. Det er et ‖14‖ nyt Jeg, der bliver sig vore tidligere Jeger bevidst. Ingen Syntese er definitiv. Selv den…
EN: …fe can again come to stand as object or element for a later synthesis. As soon as we become conscious of our preceding mental states and activities, such a transition to a new synthesis takes place, whether or not this signifies a progress, a more valuable state. It is a new I that becomes conscious of our earlier I's. No synthesis is definitive. Even the philosophy that spoke most of higher unity always fell into embarrassment when it had to speak of the highest unity.…

=== p.15
DA: …en, og Helheden ved Delene. I hvert enkelt Tilfælde, ved hver enkelt psykologisk Betragtning maa vi undersøge, ‖15‖ hvorvidt Syntesen, Helhedsdannelsen er fremskreden, og paa Grundlag heraf iagttage, hvorle…
EN: …. We here come to move in a circle, unless we are clear that an inexhaustible reciprocal action prevails: the parts are determined by the whole, and the whole by the parts. In each particular case, in each particular psychological consideration, we must investigate how far the synthesis, the formation of the whole, has advanced, and on this basis observe how the emergence of a new object operates. But the very distinction between synthesis and object is always more or less artificial in relation to the constant int…

=== p.16
DA: …sykologien og hvor vi ellers møde det. Men han fastholdt endnu Lockes Forudsætning om, at der som Grundlag for ‖16‖ Tankens sammenfattende og ordnende Virken var givet en Mangfoldighed, der først nu skulde…
EN: …ible. Kant started from the opposite point of view, that it is precisely the unconnected, the isolated and mutually independent, that is unintelligible to us, both in psychology and wherever else we meet it. But he still held fast to Locke's presupposition that, as the basis for thought's combining and ordering activity, there was given a multiplicity that was only now to be connected. Thereby he arrived at his fateful distinction between the form of cognition and its matter. This too was to cut the knot. And yet K…

=== p.17
DA: …ed Syntesebegrebet, fordi dette stedse forudsætter en Modsætning mellem Enhed og Mangfoldighed. Er det ikke en ‖17‖ Modsætning — spørger han — som kommer igen, hvad man saa tænker paa eller taler om? Hvad d…
EN: …This relation is, as already mentioned, very sharply emphasized by Henri Bergson. This thinker is not satisfied with the concept of synthesis, because it always presupposes an opposition between unity and multiplicity. Is it not an opposition—he asks—that recurs, whatever one thinks of or speaks about? What matters is to say which kind of unity and which kind of multiplicity we have in the mental life. The streaming life of the personality cannot be defined by means of concepts that always s…

=== p.20
DA: …6. I Begrebet Syntese ligger, som vi have set, en Modsæt ‖20‖ ning mellem Emne og Form, der giver Anledning til store Vanskeligheder, som blive uovervin…
EN: …6. In the concept of synthesis there lies, as we have seen, an opposition between object and form, which gives rise to great difficulties that become insuperable when by object one understands an absolutely unformed matter. As already indicated, every object will pose a double task for combining thought: to determ…

=== p.21
DA: …ldes ved direkte Paavirkning med et Stof, der bringes ind i Munden, men ogsaa ved Paavirkning af Syn, Hørelse, ‖21‖ Lugtesans eller Hudsans, under Betingelse af, at disse Sansepaavirkninger ikke for lang Ti…
EN: …ing example of a synthesis that is perhaps of a purely physiological kind is afforded by what Pavlov has called conditioned reflexes. Salivation can be produced not only by direct stimulation with a substance brought into the mouth, but also by stimulation of sight, hearing, smell, or the skin-sense, on the condition that these sense-stimulations have not occurred too long beforehand together with the action of that substance. Here an associative synthesis is at work, which makes it possible for one kind of stimula…

=== p.23
DA: …tode angaar, paa det Standpunkt, at den kræver fysiologiske Tilstande forklarede af fysiologiske Aarsager, for ‖23‖ saavidt ikke fysiske Aarsager fra Omverdenen gribe ind. Enhver Hjernetilstand eller Hjerne…
EN: …enomena, and never in so perfect a manner as in the case of material energy. Modern physiology stands, as regards method, on the standpoint that it requires physiological states to be explained by physiological causes, insofar as physical causes from the surrounding world do not intervene. Every state of the brain or brain-activity is therefore also to be explained on the basis of the earlier states of the brain and of the organism. According to strict natural-scientific method, every material state within and outs…

=== p.25
DA: …gøre den til Videnskab, — maa det anerkendes, at den faktiske Diskontinuitet og den kvalitative Forskellighed ‖25‖ mellem de psykiske Fænomener indbyrdes, stedse ville sætte Grænser for en streng Gennemfør…
EN: … demand a reduction of psychology to physiology in order for a scientific psychology to become possible—views that thus would really abolish psychology in order to make it a science—it must be acknowledged that the actual discontinuity and the qualitative difference among the psychic phenomena will always set limits to a strict carrying-through of psychology as a science. But the question is whether the path they point out leads to the goal—whether the method they praise does not at bottom contain a palpable self-c…

=== p.26
DA: …naar han stiller selve Forbindelsen (Associationen) i Modsætning til de Elementer (Forestillinger), der skulle ‖26‖ forbindes, saaledes at hin skulde kunne tænkes lokaliseret andre Steder end disse. Han ove…
EN: …gical correlates of the individual representations. It is in reality a great abstraction that Flechsig works with when he sets the connection itself (the association) in opposition to the elements (representations) that are to be connected, so that the former could be thought of as localized in places other than the latter. He thereby quite overlooks the psychological antinomy brought out above, which warns against confusing without further ado the differences and distinctions that the investigation necessitates wi…

=== p.27
DA: …Hjerne, bliver til. Erkendelsen er selv en psykisk Funktion, baade hvor den optræder som Sansning, og hvor den ‖27‖ optræder som Tænkning. Ved at betragte psykiske Tilstande og Virksomheder som tilfældige V…
EN: …hin this ``subjective'' that all cognition of material nature—physiology too, and with it the knowledge of our own body, especially of our own brain—comes into being. Cognition is itself a psychic function, both where it appears as sensation and where it appears as thinking. By regarding psychic states and activities as accidental appendages (``epiphenomena''), the natural scientist would saw off the branch on which he sits. To study this branch itself is, to be sure, not his task; but he does well, nonetheless, no…

=== p.28
DA: …nd Erfaringen berettiger til. Nøjagtig Eftertanke fører ofte til at opdage, at selv hvor der syntes at være et ‖28‖ psykisk tomt Rum, var der i Virkeligheden givet et psykisk Indhold, skønt det ikke fattede…
EN: …t is the discontinuity and the qualitative differences that cause psychology's difficulties. But greater weight is often placed on them than experience warrants. Precise reflection often leads to the discovery that even where there seemed to be a psychically empty space, there was in reality a psychic content given, although it was not grasped by attention or by recognition, or was forgotten immediately after the experience. And as regards the qualitative differences, observation will often find more and finer nuan…

=== p.29
DA: …vet Selviagttagelse tilgængeligt Resultat. Allerede en Sammenligning mellem moderne og antik eller middelalder ‖29‖ lig Poesi viser, hvor langt flere sjælelige Nuancer Selviagttagelsen nu har faaet Øje for.…
EN: … the elements that are vanishingly small in relation to the clearly conscious states, and that only by being summed up and combined produce a result accessible to untrained self-observation. Already a comparison between modern and ancient or medieval poetry shows how many more mental nuances self-observation has now come to perceive. It is scarcely only because the nuancing in the psychic domain is now in itself greater than in earlier times that this greater richness is found. It is partly precisely the knowledge …

=== p.30
DA: …illing, hver enkelt Stemning og hver enkelt Drift er i en saadan Karakter tydeligt bestemt ved sin Plads inden ‖30‖ for den Helhed, den tilhører, og som den selv bidrager til at forme.…
EN: …e guiding thought, that we have here a causal connection that is every bit as firm and definite as any in the physical domain. Every single representation, every single mood, and every single impulse is, in such a character, clearly determined by its place within the whole to which it belongs and which it itself helps to shape.…

=== p.31
DA: …er er en lang Vej til absolut Hvile — og det kunde jo være, at den ligesaalidt forekommer paa det psykiske som ‖31‖ paa det fysiske Omraade. Mulighed bestaar overalt i en Virkelighed, hvad enten denne er os…
EN: …use it contains a summons to go ever further in observation and analysis in order to find as much continuity as possible between the different states of the mental life. There is a long way to absolute rest—and it might be that it occurs as little in the psychic as in the physical domain. Possibility everywhere subsists in an actuality, whether or not this is accessible to us.…

=== p.32
DA: …omers Bevægelser. Problemet vedbliver at være det samme, selvom Elektroner træde istedetfor Atomer. Det er den ‖32‖ rumlige Beskaffenhed, der for Filosofien er den afgørende Egenskab ved Materien; heri har…
EN: …he problem of the relation between the spiritual and the material. The vibrations of the imponderable ether are just as different from the psychic phenomena as the movements of the ponderable atoms. The problem remains the same, even if electrons take the place of atoms. It is the spatial character that, for philosophy, is the decisive property of matter; in this Descartes saw rightly. It must not here mislead us that physicists sometimes use the expression the immaterial in the sense of the imponderable.—…

=== p.33
DA: …hold i matematisk Betydning af Ordet, denne Opfattelse antager mellem de sjælelige og de materielle Fænomener: ‖33‖ vi søge, og ofte finde vi ogsaa, at en Varieren af de sjælelige Tilstande svarer til en Va…
EN: …ossible, and to investigate the relation between them, the analogies and proportionalities, as exactly as possible. It is a functional relation, in the mathematical sense of the word, that this conception assumes between the mental and the material phenomena; we seek, and often we also find, that a variation of the mental states corresponds to a variation of the bodily states, especially the brain-states, and vice versa. And to this is in reality confined the knowledge we have of these things. Our hypothesis (for w…

=== p.34
DA: …e Former. I hvert Tilfælde vilde ethvert Forsøg paa at danne et saadant Begreb falde udenfor Psykologiens Græn ‖34‖ ser. I en senere Sammenhæng ville vi komme tilbage til det Problem, vi her forlade.…
EN: …elations between phenomena in space. And we cannot, unfortunately, form a concept of energy from which the physical and the psychic concepts of energy could be derived as special forms. In any case, every attempt to form such a concept would fall outside the limits of psychology. In a later connection we shall return to the problem we here leave.…

=== p.36
DA: …rpaa denne Krog er gjort fast. „Substansen“ kunde ligesaa godt behøve en „Bærer“ som Virksomheden. Ligesom man ‖36‖ før spurgte, hvem der „har“ Energien, kunde man her spørge, hvem der „har“ Sjælen eller Je…
EN: …mental life will evaporate if it is not hung upon a ``something,'' a ``substance,'' as upon a secure hook—although one is not so consistent as to ask upon what this hook is fastened. The ``substance'' could just as well need a ``bearer'' as the activity. Just as one earlier asked who ``has'' the energy, so one might here ask who ``has'' the soul or the I.—Thinkers such as Fichte, Sibbern, and Wundt have the merit of having seen clearly on this point.…

=== p.37
DA: …Organismen. Nervesystemets Funktioner, til hvilke de sjælelige Virksomheder svare, ere ikke blotte Virkninger ‖37‖ af ydre Indflydelse, men bestemte i Form og Retning fra Individets første Tilblivelse af.…
EN: …s of the organism that first appear with distinctness, and that from the first it occupies a central position in relation to other parts of the organism. The functions of the nervous system, to which the mental activities correspond, are not mere effects of outer influence, but determined in form and direction from the individual's first coming into being.—…

=== p.38
DA: …n, naar det Nye i de nævnte tre Henseender staar i et vist bestemt Modsætningsforhold til det forud Givne. Maa ‖38‖ ske er af de tre Betingelser Pludseligheden den vigtigste, hvilket fra et praktisk biologi…
EN: … suddenness, and a certain degree of qualitative difference—all in relation to the given state of consciousness. A sensation arises only when the new, in the three respects mentioned, stands in a certain definite relation of opposition to what was previously given. Perhaps, of the three conditions, suddenness is the most important, which from a practical biological point of view is easily understandable, since it is of importance in the struggle for existence to be awakened to attention for changes in the surroundi…

=== p.39
DA: …nnet sig under Indflydelse af Eftertanken, har ikke Udtryk for saa simple sjælelige Funktioner som dem, vi her ‖39‖ staa overfor. Sprogbrugen er snart tilbøjelig til at sætte en meget stor Forskel mellem de…
EN: …all the sensation a distinguishing—and so far a thinking—and already in it to find an expression of psychic energy. Language, which has formed itself under the influence of reflection, has no expressions for functions so simple as those we here confront. Linguistic usage is inclined now to set a very great difference between the simplest psychic functions and the more developed ones, now to read ``inferences'' and other forms of reflection without further ado into the simplest utterances of consciousness. But by th…

=== p.40
DA: …em, hvis den skal naa sit Maal. Grunden hertil er, at de ikke blot ere Udtryk for noget fra vor Bevidsthed For ‖40‖ skelligt, men tillige for selve vor Bevidstheds Natur og Virkemaade.…
EN: … without further ado to form a coherent and intelligible world-picture. Reflection must at once use them and disregard them if it is to reach its goal. The reason for this is that they are not only the expression of something different from our consciousness, but also of the very nature and mode of operation of our consciousness.…

=== p.41
DA: …en anden, for Løsningen af Erkendelsens Opgave mere hensigtsmæssig Maade. Forstanden kan saaledes godt paa en ‖41‖ Gang bruge og omstyrte Sansningen. Og „Omstyrtningen“ sker tildels ved Sansningens egen Hj…
EN: …sation over again, it is thus not because with it a wholly new principle comes into force. It is only psychic energy operating in another manner, more appropriate for the solution of the task of cognition. The understanding can thus quite well at once use and overturn sensation. And the ``overturning'' takes place partly with sensation's own help, in that the one sense controls the other. To the relation between the qualities within the one sense there can correspond relations between qualities within the other sen…

=== p.42
DA: …krankerne og deraf følgende Retnings- og Hastighedsændringer. For vor Sansning fremtræder den dog som et Hele, ‖42‖ indenfor hvilken vi Intet skelne. Og det Samme gælder, som allerede tidligere bemærket, om…
EN: …this. According to it, every gas is an elastic fluid whose elements are in constant movement, with numerous collisions against one another and against the barriers, and consequent changes of direction and velocity. For our sensation it nonetheless appears as a whole, within which we distinguish nothing. And the same holds, as already remarked earlier, of the relation of sensations to the brain-processes. What in our consciousness appears as a single sensation corresponds to a very composite reciprocal action betwee…

=== p.43
DA: …un sekundært et Middel til at lære Tilværelsens Natur at kende. Sammenhængen mellem dens praktiske og dens teo ‖43‖ retiske Betydning ligger i Begrebet Tegn eller Symbol. Tegnet kan være Signal til Handling…
EN: …artes, Malebranche, and Berkeley. Modern evolutionary theory has again brought out this point of view. Sensation is first and foremost a means in the struggle for life, only secondarily a means to come to know the nature of existence. The connection between its practical and its theoretical significance lies in the concept of sign or symbol. The sign can be a signal for action; but it can also become a signal that announces the setting-in of a certain change, apart from the action necessitated by this change. There…

=== p.44
DA: …ten er størst, som paa Synssansens Omraade, afbrydes den dog paa bestemte Steder, og Kvalitetsrækken er stedse ‖44‖ begrænset. Ultrarøde Straaler er Nethinden ikke modtagelig for, og ultraviolette Straaler…
EN: …Each single one of our senses has its series of qualities, more or less continuous and systematic. Even where the continuity is greatest, as in the domain of the sense of sight, it is nonetheless interrupted at definite places, and the series of qualities is always limited. To infra-red rays the retina is not receptive, and ultra-violet rays affect it only at a particularly great degree of strength. This limitation, which probably has its ground in certain physical or physiological conditions, and per…

=== p.45
DA: …t udligne denne Forstyrrelse. Og denne Tendens fremtræder i to Former, en mere elementær, der bestaar i Sammen ‖45‖ smeltning, og en højere, der bestaar i Dannelse af en Sanseanskuelse.…
EN: …The psychic equilibrium must be abolished for a sensation to arise. But there always expresses itself a tendency to equalize this disturbance. And this tendency appears in two forms, a more elementary one, which consists in fusion, and a higher one, which consists in the formation of a sense-intuition.…

=== p.46
DA: …ge de andre. Med mindst mulig Forandring indlemmes da det nye Indhold, en Fornemmelse bringer, i Bevidsthedens ‖46‖ hele Sammenhæng. Sanseanskuelsen løser en dobbelt Opgave, idet den paa en Gang lader den e…
EN: …on, a sense-intuition can form itself, in that the sensations are ordered in such a way that each single one can make itself felt without swallowing up or supplanting the others. With the least possible change, the new content that a sensation brings is then incorporated into the whole connection of consciousness. The sense-intuition solves a double task, in that it at once lets the novelty and peculiarity of the single sensation and the connection of conscious life come into their own. It presents at once multipli…

=== p.47
DA: …14. En ren Sanseanskuelse vilde være en saadan, i hvil ‖47‖ ken en Mangfoldighed uvilkaarligt ordnes, uden at tidligere Oplevelser eller Erfaringer me…
EN: …14. A pure sense-intuition would be one in which a multiplicity is involuntarily ordered without earlier lived experiences or experiences contributing. Apart from the most primitive states, such a pure sensation scarcely occurs. As soon as, in the multiplicity that is ordered, there are found elements that have p…

=== p.48
DA: …det Nærværende staar her umiddelbart som Et med et tidligere Oplevet. Der er et Tilhold, et Hjemsted for det i ‖48‖ Bevidstheden. Platon kaldte Hunden et filosofisk Dyr, fordi dens Adfærd overfor Mennesker…
EN: …that the relation of likeness now makes itself felt marks a significant advance. One can already here speak of an understanding: the present here stands immediately as one with something earlier experienced. There is a foothold, a home for it in consciousness. Plato called the dog a philosophical animal, because its behavior toward men is determined by whether it knows them or not. In this sense newly hatched chicks too are philosophical animals, since they scratch only when they feel gravel under their feet, not o…

=== p.49
DA: …er, tidligere Paavirkninger have efterladt. I begge Tilfælde er det først Resultaterne, ikke Forudsætningerne, ‖49‖ der optræde i Bevidstheden. Den elementære Skelnen og den umiddelbare Identificeren ere de…
EN: …iate recognition arises on the presupposition of a relation of likeness between the influence of a stimulation and the dispositions or after-effects that earlier stimulations have left behind. In both cases it is only the results, not the presuppositions, that appear in consciousness. The elementary distinguishing and the immediate identifying are the first intimations of what at higher stages appears as thinking in the narrower sense of the word.…

=== p.50
DA: …Det er kun en Analogi, der er mellem den umiddelbare ‖50‖ Genkendelse og Eftertanken. Man har ikke Ret til uden videre at identificere den med Tanke…
EN: …It is only an analogy that obtains between immediate recognition and reflection. One has no right to identify it without further ado with acts of thought performed with clear consciousness. It would thus be incorrect to call it a judgment, as several authors have done. For a judgment there is required a transitio…

=== p.51
DA: …‖51‖ Baade ved umiddelbar, ved partiel og ved middelbar Genkendelse væves en uvilkaarlig Fortol…
EN: …In immediate, in partial, and in mediate recognition alike, an involuntary interpretation is woven into apparently simple observations. It is a surplus of energy that makes us at once interpret the given and, in virtue of the fundamental law of synthesis, bring it into connection with previously given content. Later, renewed observation may perhaps correct our first interpretations and expectations. But it is only by the contribution we ourselves…

=== p.52
DA: …17. Jo længere Mellemrummet bliver mellem Forvent ‖52‖ ningens Opstaaen og dens Bekræftelse eller Berigtigelse, des mere selvstændigt optræde For…
EN: …17. The longer the interval becomes between the arising of the expectation and its confirmation or correction, the more independently the representations appear—the more liberated they become, or can become, from the impressions that first awakened them. There can then—on the presupposition of sufficient energ…

=== p.53
DA: …ave at sammenfatte en Mangfoldighed af Elementer. Baade Enheden og Mangfoldigheden skulle komme til deres Ret. ‖53‖ I Erindring og Fantasi sammenarbejdes et mere eller mindre rigt Erfarings- og Forestilling…
EN: …Memory- and imagination-intuition is, like sense-intuition, a form in which the energy of consciousness solves the task of combining a multiplicity of elements. Both the unity and the multiplicity are to come into their own. In memory and imagination a more or less rich content of experience and representation is worked together into a whole, often in such a way that a quite different ordering comes about than the original one. Such total images have their definite directions, dete…

=== p.54
DA: …lede, vi have dannet os af en poetisk Skikkelse. Vore Erindringer og Fantasibilleder have deres egen Historie, ‖54‖ hvis enkelte Stadier det ikke altid er let at efterspore, ligesaa lidt som det er let at f…
EN: … memory or our imagination can thus shift without our noticing it. It can be one of our earlier experiences that is thus altered, or the image we have formed of a poetic figure. Our memories and imagination-images have their own history, whose individual stages it is not always easy to trace, any more than it is easy to find the grounds for their shifts. Their history takes place in the involuntary mental life, right down in the ground of nature within us, and reflection can here often only ascertain that changes h…

=== p.55
DA: …uden hos de højest udviklede Dyr. Hunden, der løber hen imod en Mand, som den „tror“ er dens Herre, vil under ‖55‖ Løbet stadigt ændre sin Anskuen, alt efter som Mandens Træk blive tydeligere, og naar diss…
EN: …ith functionally articulated sense-intuition probably has preponderance over the capacity for reflection, if the latter occurs at all except in the most highly developed animals. The dog that runs toward a man whom it ``believes'' to be its master will, during the running, constantly alter its intuiting, according as the man's features become more distinct, and when these features finally show themselves to be quite other than the master's, a disappointment will arise; but whether the free memory-image of the maste…

=== p.56
DA: …der Anskuelsen, ikke under Dommen. Udtrykket artikuleret Anskuelse synes at passe bedst, da Anskuelsesbilledet ‖56‖ ikke behøver at opløses, fordi et enkelt Element udhæves stærkt. Hvis en ny Artikulation i…
EN: …ogique des images). This expression is more fortunate, since the image-forming, intuiting process is decidedly the essential thing in the phenomena here in question. They belong under intuition, not under judgment. The expression articulated intuition seems to fit best, since the intuitive image need not be dissolved because a single element is strongly brought out. If a new articulation within the intuition is not possible, a new intuition can form itself, within which the changes come into their own. Possibly the…

=== p.57
DA: …eber, Domme og Slutninger, er den klare Bevidsthed om de enkelte Dele af Bevidsthedens Indhold og om deres ind ‖57‖ byrdes Forhold. Gennem Eftertankens Skærsild kan det snart vise sig, at vi vide Mere, end…
EN: … out deficiencies and determines exactly the mutual relation of the elements. The new that reflection brings and expresses in concepts, judgments, and inferences is the clear consciousness of the individual parts of the content of consciousness and of their mutual relation. Through the purgatory of reflection it can soon show itself that we know more than we thought we knew, in that there can lie in the content of consciousness unsuspected presuppositions for orderings and inferences—soon that we know less than we …

=== p.58
DA: …lem „Subjekt“ og „Prædikat“, medens der i Anskuelsen raader en mere kontinuerlig Forbindelse. Naar jeg tror at ‖58‖ kende en Person, der nærmer sig, ser jeg ham umiddelbart for mig som den, jeg antager ham…
EN: …ment, as Gassendi said. The difference between intuiting and judgment is that the latter lets the elements step forth independently, so that a distinction can be made between ``subject'' and ``predicate,'' while in the intuition a more continuous connection prevails. When I believe I know a person who approaches, I see him immediately before me as the one I take him to be; but if I feel an urge for a closer testing, I institute a comparison that distinguishes between the figure that approaches and the memory-image …

=== p.59
DA: …ns. Elementerne ere ikke ligegyldige ved den Sammenhæng, i hvilken de staa. I Anskuelsen staar et Element i en ‖59‖ enkelt speciel Sammenhæng; Dommen bringer det i Sammenhæng dels med Elementer, der vel lig…
EN: …is an essential change that takes place in the transition from intuition to judgment. When one does not embrace the psychological atomism that I have combated above, it must be clear that the elements of consciousness undergo essential changes by passing into new connections, and the connections of judgment can be quite other than those of intuition. The elements are not indifferent to the connection in which they stand. In the intuition an element stands in a single special connection; the judgment brings it into connection partly with elements that lie within the same intuition, but perhaps at great distance, partly with elements from other intuitions. In the intuition I dwell, e.g., on a man's action as a total image and am absorbed in the mood this awakens in me; in the judgment ``he has acted nobly!'' I make use of a standard with which I more or less consciously compare the action.…

=== p.60
DA: …heden, ligesaa uvilkaarligt kan en Forestilling drage en anden efter sig, denne en tredie o. s. v. I begge Til ‖60‖ fælde virke Love, der ikke selv komme til Bevidsthed. Den artikulerende Anskuelse staar As…
EN: …Just as involuntarily as an intuitive image can emerge in consciousness, just as involuntarily can one representation draw another after it, this a third, and so on. In both cases laws operate that do not themselves come to consciousness. The articulating intuition stands closest to association; but in it too the dynamic is still subordinate to the static, since the shift quickly leads to a resting image.…

=== p.61
DA: …berettiget vil Forventningen være. Dersom det er en Lighedsassociation, vi have for os, vil Overgangen fra det ‖61‖ ene Led ($a_1$) til det andet ($a_2$) være saa meget des mere berettiget, jo mere Ligheden…
EN: …be shown that a cannot set in without being followed by b. The greater the continuity between a and b, so that they really form a whole, the more justified the expectation will be. If it is an association by likeness that we have before us, the transition from the one member ($a_1$) to the other ($a_2$) will be the more justified the more the likeness approaches identity; it is then merely a transition from one example to another. Thus association approaches judgment the more the transition from object to object is…

=== p.62
DA: …overvejende Lighedsassociation). Paa begge Maader kan det enkelte Element blive indlemmet i den hele psykiske ‖62‖ Verden, og dets relative Isolation kan ophæves. Hvilken af de forskellige Veje der slaas i…
EN: … movement. Now the incompletely given is filled out (by predominant association by contiguity), now one circles around it through dwelling with kindred representations (by predominant association by likeness). In both ways the single element can be incorporated into the whole psychic world, and its relative isolation can be abolished. Which of the different paths is taken in the particular case—and which special relations of likeness or contiguity come to operate—nonetheless does not depend on purely intellectual c…

=== p.63
DA: …en indre Begrænsning er for den, medens denne skal betegne en bestemt Afslutning. „Associationen,“ siger W. Je ‖63‖ rusalem, „er aldrig afsluttet i sig selv. Stedse nye Led slutte sig til, stedse nye Afvige…
EN: …Yet another opposition has been found between association and judgment, in that the former is supposed always to be able to be continued, since there is no inner limitation for it, while the latter is supposed to denote a definite conclusion. ``Association,'' says W. Jerusalem, ``is never concluded in itself. Ever new members attach themselves, ever new deviations from the original direction take place, and nowhere is there found a natural conclusion lying in the very nature of association ... In…

=== p.64
DA: …Der ligger to Genstande foran mig paa Bordet, som jeg kan se med ét Blik. Men skønt de begge ere indenfor min ‖64‖ Synskreds, kan jeg fæste min Opmærksomhed snart paa den ene, snart paa den anden, bevæge m…
EN: …There lie two objects before me on the table, which I can see at a single glance. But although they are both within my field of vision, I can fix my attention now on the one, now on the other, move back and forth between them without necessarily moving my eyes. The one object does not fall out of the field of vision because attention is directed toward the other. By s…

=== p.65
DA: …strengeste Betydning er den Lighed, et Emne har med sig selv. Naar forskellige Emner siges at være identiske, ‖65‖ menes, at det er, somom Opmærksomheden vendte tilbage til samme Emne; og omvendt vil det,…
EN: … all appears—apart from the exertion involved in the alternation of attention itself—the relation between the two objects stands as a relation of identity. Identity in the strictest sense is the likeness an object has with itself. When different objects are said to be identical, the meaning is that it is as if attention returned to the same object; and conversely, that an object is the same means that attention can return to it without any difference appearing.…

=== p.66
DA: …ng om sit Maal). Og her er egentligt Mere end Analogi; ti der gives en Trang til at sammenligne ligesom til at ‖66‖ handle, og i begge Tilfælde kan det være af Betydning, at man bliver sig bevidst, hvad man…
EN: … An analogy in the domain of will is formed by the transition from urge or instinct to drive (when by drive we understand an urge connected with a representation of its goal). And here there is really more than analogy; for there is an urge to compare just as to act, and in both cases it can be of importance that one becomes conscious of what one feels an urge for.…

=== p.67
DA: …rem opstilles som Formaal. Det er en Trang til Klarhed og Tydelighed, til Brug af den sammenfattende Evne, der ‖67‖ udgør Bevidsthedens inderste Væsen. Ofte, og især under de mest elementære aandelige Kaar,…
EN: …In all comparison an urge makes itself felt, even if the finding-out of relations of likeness and difference is not directly set up as a purpose. It is an urge for clarity and distinctness, for the use of the combining capacity that constitutes the innermost essence of consciousness. Often, and especially under the most elementary spiritual conditions, it is a downright urge for self-preservation that leads to thinking. When something that has value for the subsistence of life does not immedi…

=== p.68
DA: …ges et Subjekt. Intet Begreb kan paa en Gang indeholde og udelukke et vist Kendemærke. En Begrundelse af denne ‖68‖ Ejendommelighed ved vor Tænken kan ikke gives. Den hænger aabenbart sammen med det psykolo…
EN: …s. We stand here before a fundamental peculiarity of our thinking. This moves forward through two-membered relations. A predicate must either be ascribed or not ascribed to a subject. No concept can at once contain and exclude a certain mark. A grounding of this peculiarity of our thinking cannot be given. It is evidently bound up with the psychological fact that attention, during reflection, can be concentrated only on one element at a time, and that comparison takes place through the passage from one element to a…

=== p.69
DA: …nden følgende Led. En middelbar Forbindelse kan først ske efter en Række af umiddelbare Forbindelser, saaledes ‖69‖ kommer der en middelbar Forbindelse istand mellem a og d, naar der successivt er sket en F…
EN: …n a definite way can immediately consist only of two members. Every immediate comparison that leads to a definite connection concerns two immediately consecutive members. A mediate connection can take place only after a series of immediate connections; thus a mediate connection comes about between a and d when there has successively taken place a connection of a and b, b and c, c and d.…

=== p.70
DA: …En af de ældre Psykologer, der har lagt mest Vægt paa Villieselementet i Tænkningen, Charles Bonnet, har ‖70‖ udtalt den Sætning: L'attention est la mère du génie. Men saa afgørende Koncentrationen i…
EN: …One of the older psychologists who has laid most weight on the will-element in thinking, Charles Bonnet, has stated the proposition: L'attention est la mère du génie. But however decisive concentration in a single direction is, it nonetheless gives only the introduction, the impulse. No less important is it that, as a consequence of this impulse, a series of intuitions…

=== p.72
DA: …unne betragte et etkelt Emne som Exempel paa hele Rækken, have vi dannet et Almenbegreb. Mellem de forskellige ‖72‖ Exempler paa et og samme typisk eller alment Begreb behøver der ikke at være Identitet, ku…
EN: …t, in that a single state comes to stand as an example of the whole series; when we hold together and compare a whole series of objects and can regard a single object as an example of the whole series, we have formed a general concept. Between the different examples of one and the same typical or general concept there need not be identity, only analogy. It is only in certain definite respects (indicated in the concept's definition) that the examples can take the place of one another. In place of the example there c…

=== p.73
DA: …Den Forskel, der dog stedse kan gøres mellem Begreb og ‖73‖ Dom, er et nyt Exempel paa den Antinomi, der — som tidligere paavist — ligger i Bevidsthed…
EN: …The difference that can nonetheless always be made between concept and judgment is a new example of the antinomy that—as earlier shown—lies in the nature of consciousness: synthesis presupposes elements, but these are only what they are by being comprehended by the synthesis. Hereby is explained the constant unrest in …

=== p.74
DA: …tsforhold, viser dens Slægtskab sig tydeligt med de Former og Processer, der danne dens psykologiske Grundlag. ‖74‖ Ligesom disse er den en Form, i hvilken Bevidstheden søger Enhed og Harmoni i sit Indhold,…
EN: …When, with Leibniz, one conceives judgment as the expression of a relation of identity, its kinship shows itself clearly with the forms and processes that form its psychological basis. Like these, it is a form in which consciousness seeks unity and harmony in its content, and it is, like them, a stage in the constant breaking of likenesses and differences. It lets both the relation of likeness and that of difference come into their own to a g…

=== p.75
DA: …ystspil og i en Tragedie lægger sine Personer Ytringer i denne Retning i Munden. „Taushed er Glædens bedste He ‖75‖ rold; jeg vilde kun være lidet lykkelig, dersom jeg kunde sige, hvor lykkelig jeg er,“ sig…
EN: … whole experience. Experience shows that one must to a certain degree have freed oneself from an experience in order to be able to convert it into a judgment. It is more than rhetoric when Shakespeare, both in a comedy and in a tragedy, puts utterances in this direction into the mouths of his characters. ``Silence is the perfectest herald of joy: I were but little happy, if I could say how much,'' says Claudio (Much Ado About Nothing II, 1). ``The worst is not so long as we can say, `This is the worst,''' exclaims …

=== p.76
DA: …en Helhed, nemlig en Helhed, der omfatter begge de to hinanden udelukkende Helheder. Ved Spørgsmaalet „Er han ‖76‖ død?“ drejer det sig om, hvorvidt vi skulle tænke os de Levendes Verden med ham eller uden…
EN: … o'clock?) Yet the difference between the two kinds of question is not absolute; for in the decision-question too it is a matter of the filling-out of a whole, namely a whole that comprises both of the two mutually exclusive wholes. In the question ``Is he dead?'' it is a matter of whether we are to think of the world of the living with him or without him. Only, this larger horizon here stands more in the background, and that comprehensive world can in turn have different extent.…

=== p.78
DA: …opula. Saadanne bekræftende Domme ere en særegen Art af positive Domme. Med Urette mente Hegel, at fortællende ‖78‖ Sætninger, der ikke afvise en Tvivl om Rigtigheden af det Fortalte, ikke fortjene Navn af…
EN: …ive judgment, and which is often expressed by means of more or less solemnly asseverating words (``truly,'' ``really'') or by strong emphasis on the copula. Such affirmative judgments are a peculiar kind of positive judgments. Hegel wrongly held that narrative sentences which do not reject a doubt about the correctness of what is narrated do not deserve the name of judgments. A narrative judgment will, when it is more than idle repetition, be the fruit of an analysis of events or reports, hence of a work of thought…

=== p.79
DA: …Man kunde kalde den ene Art Problemer Udfyldningsproblemer, den anden Art Frigørelsesproblemer. Ved den ‖79‖ første Art ligger Problemets Brod i Ufuldstændigheden af vor Tankeverden; ved den anden Ar…
EN: …One might call the one kind of problems completion-problems, the other kind liberation-problems. In the first kind the sting of the problem lies in the incompleteness of our world of thought; in the second kind the sting lies in a discord within our world of thought. Common to both kinds is the relation of tension (vital difference) described by Avenarius in his natur…

=== p.80
DA: …k: vi kunne ikke Andet end tro dette eller hint! De primitive etiske Bud have en overvejende negativ Form: „Du ‖80‖ skal ikke —“ Det har været Opgaven at sætte Skranker, indenfor hvilke Livet kunde udfolde…
EN: …e of the excluded middle, were set up before the positive one (the principle of identity). Our criterion of reality often gets a negative expression: we cannot but believe this or that! The primitive ethical commandments have a predominantly negative form: ``Thou shalt not—.'' It has been the task to set up barriers within which life could unfold. The commandments are the tribe's reaction against those who deviate from the paths that have shown themselves salutary. Indignation and disapproval express themselves bef…

=== p.81
DA: …et vi ikke kunne sige Andet om det, end at det er forskelligt fra et andet, bestemt og positivt karakteriseret ‖81‖ Omraade. Det bliver saa den fortsatte Forskens Opgave at finde positive Kendemærker for de…
EN: …The history of classification shows us interesting examples of how we often have to content ourselves with staking off a domain, in that we can say nothing else about it than that it is different from another, definitely and positively characterized domain. It then becomes the task of continued inquiry to find positive marks for the domain thus staked off. Aristotle divided animals into rational and irrational, the irrational again into those that had (red) blood and those that did not have (…

=== p.82
DA: …st ved et Vejskel, hvor den ikke kan komme videre, hverken som Klassifikation eller som Induktion. Vi vilde da ‖82‖ staa ved en Afslutning af den Proces, der begyndte med den første, primitive Skelnen. Genn…
EN: … mean paths that are barred, while under classification they mean paths that are left for later inquiry to travel. Perhaps our cognition ends finally at a crossroads where it can get no further, neither as classification nor as induction. We would then stand at a conclusion of the process that began with the first, primitive distinguishing. Through the forward-driving force of differences and oppositions, lacks and contradictions, ever higher forms of psychic energy have been developed, until the limit is reached w…

=== p.83
DA: …Sammenhængen med hele Anskuelsen eller hele Rækken, i hvilken det forekommer, saa at dets Forhold til Helheden ‖83‖ kan staa klart. Kontinuiteten er den stadige Forudsætning for en frugtbar Anvendelse af Op…
EN: …ss favorable conditions for the arising of a judgment. The decisive thing is that, however much attention is directed toward a single member, the connection with the whole intuition or the whole series in which it occurs is nonetheless preserved, so that its relation to the whole can stand clear. Continuity is the constant presupposition for a fruitful application of attention in a single definite direction. It does not go, as older presentations of logic might mislead one to believe, that one first knows the indiv…

=== p.84
DA: …s Former. Særligt hvad Dommen angaar, har man overført Forhold og Former fra den grammatiske Sætnings ved Spro ‖84‖ gets Love bestemte Natur til umiddelbart at gælde for selve Tankevirksomheden. Dette har i…
EN: … of judgment apart from one another. The psychology of cognition and logic have developed under the constant influence of grammar and its forms. Especially as regards judgment, one has transferred relations and forms from the nature of the grammatical sentence, determined by the laws of language, to hold immediately for the thought-activity itself. This has especially had influence on the conception of the relation between subject and predicate in judgment, a relation I shall now attempt to illuminate.…

=== p.85
DA: …gte han, naar han saa Noget bevæge sig, f. Ex. naar de høje Græs paa Plænen, hvor han legede, bevægede sig for ‖85‖ Vinden. Det var tydeligt nok Bevægelsen, der lagde Beslag paa hans Opmærksomhed i Modsætni…
EN: …l children are especially occupied with what moves. A little boy of a year and a half said, when he saw an animal coming, ``Bow'' (from bow-wow), and the same word he used when he saw something move, e.g. when the tall grass on the lawn where he played moved in the wind. It was clearly enough the movement that laid claim to his attention, in contrast to the preceding, relatively resting state. The resting and unchanged called forth no outburst. The exclamation ``A star!'' when a star is suddenly discovered in the b…

=== p.86
DA: …e forlade en Egn og i store Skarer mylre over en Bro; stedse nye Flokke komme til: „det var, som det ej skulde ‖86‖ Ende faa.“ Det, der ikke syntes at skulle faa Ende, var Nissernes Mylren. Det ubestemte In…
EN: …nd can construct it in more or less definite form. In Kaalund's poem ``Nissernes Vandring'' it is described how the nisses leave a region and in great throngs swarm over a bridge; ever new flocks come: ``it was as if it would never come to an end.'' What seemed as if it would never come to an end was the swarming of the nisses. The indefinite impression of the endless is emphasized by the sentence's having no definite grammatical subject. In Schiller's poem ``Die Erwartung'' the lover waits for his beloved; every s…

=== p.87
DA: …rminus a qvo og derved oversætte de mest primitive Udraab til logiske Domme. Men Udgangselementet kan være for ‖87‖ svindende i Forhold til Slutningselementet. Hypnotiske og ekstatiske Tilstande betegne Høj…
EN: …ent is never lacking (even if it does not become a distinct initial representation), and logically regarded one will always be able to construct such a terminus a quo and thereby translate the most primitive exclamations into logical judgments. But the initial element can be vanishing in relation to the final element. Hypnotic and ecstatic states denote the culmination in this respect.…

=== p.88
DA: …31. Ogsaa i Domme, i hvilke baade Subjekt og Prædikat ‖88‖ udtrykkes, vedbliver det logiske Prædikat at være det mest fremtrædende Element, medens Su…
EN: …31. Also in judgments in which both subject and predicate are expressed, the logical predicate continues to be the most prominent element, while the subject can stand in different degrees of obscurity. It is on this relation between the obscure or indefinite and the clear or definite that one must fix attention …

=== p.89
DA: …32. Er nu et Prædikat knyttet til et Subjekt som nærmere ‖89‖ Bestemmelse af dette, da er der dannet et nyt, fuldstændigere Begreb end det Subjektsbegre…
EN: …32. If now a predicate is attached to a subject as a closer determination of it, then a new, more complete concept has been formed than the subject-concept one began with. The earlier predicate has now become an attribute. The attributes of existence (fundamental properties or fundamental forms) are found by analysis…

=== p.90
DA: …Benno Erdmann polemiserer herimod og hævder, at i en Dom som den anførte hører det kvantitave Attribut til ‖90‖ det logiske Subjekt og er ikke Prædikat; man kunde ellers, mener han, med samme Ret gøre a…
EN: …Benno Erdmann polemicizes against this and maintains that in a judgment such as the one cited the quantitative attribute belongs to the logical subject and is not predicate; one could otherwise, he holds, with the same right make all attributes predicates, which would be a forced reinterpretation of the linguistic mode of expression. But precisely the linguistic mode of expres…

=== p.91
DA: …’s Logik), at man kun ved at agte paa den Sammenhæng, i hvilken en Sætning forekommer, kan afgøre, hvad der er ‖91‖ det logiske Subjekt, og hvad der er det logiske Prædikat: L'unique et véritable règle est…
EN: …s to be laid, that is, where the logical predicate lies. Every skilled reader-aloud knows this. And it was long ago stated in the old Art de penser (Port-Royal's Logic) that only by attending to the connection in which a sentence occurs can one decide what is the logical subject and what is the logical predicate: L'unique et véritable règle est de regarder par le sens ce dont on affirme, et ce qu'on affirme. Car le premier est toujours le sujet, et le dernier l'attribut [i.e. le prédicat], en quelque ordre qu'ils s…

=== p.92
DA: …betones i det sproglige Udsagn. Interessen for Subjektet afføder Interessen for Prædikatet. Hele Domsdannelsen ‖92‖ vilde være overflødig, hvis Interessen for Subjektet ikke hæmmedes ved dettes Ubestemthed.…
EN: … arises before the final representation is reached, and this tension is replaced by the interest in the predicate found, which is therefore emphasized in the linguistic utterance. The interest in the subject begets the interest in the predicate. The whole formation of judgment would be superfluous if the interest in the subject were not inhibited by its indefiniteness. The mystic, who revels in his one, constant thought, forms no judgment; and his object would—on account of its unity and lack of difference—only be …

=== p.93
DA: …bl. A. indeholder Subjektet i sig. I Modsætning hertil har Benno Erdmann gjort gældende, at det er Subjektet, ‖93‖ der bestemmer Prædikatet, idet dettes Indhold indordnes i hint. „Manden er god“ vil altsaa…
EN: … predicate is continens, the subject contentum. Here only the subject gets a determination, the predicate none—beyond this, that it contains, among other things, the subject in itself. In contrast to this, Benno Erdmann has maintained that it is the subject that determines the predicate, in that the latter's content is subordinated to the former. ``The man is good'' will thus here mean: ``The property goodness is a part of the man's being.'' These apparently conflicting conceptions are easily reconciled when one re…

=== p.94
DA: …der under Domsdannelsen er Udgangsforestilling, og hvad der er Slutforestilling. Forskellen mellem Subjekt og ‖94‖ Prædikat taber sin Betydning, naar man formulerer Dommen saa nøjagtigt som muligt, hvilket…
EN: …torian; but the logician as such asks for grounding and proof. In the last instance, therefore, it really does not concern logic what, during the formation of judgment, is initial representation and what is final representation. The difference between subject and predicate loses its significance when one formulates the judgment as exactly as possible, which is attained by expressing it in the form of an equation, as the designation of a relation of identity of a certain kind. This path Leibniz entered upon in some …

=== p.95
DA: …I en logisk Ligning staar Forholdet mellem Dommens ‖95‖ Led for os med ét Slag, aldeles klart og præcist. Her er paa fuldkommen Maade naat, hvad A…
EN: …In a logical equation the relation between the judgment's members stands before us at a single stroke, wholly clear and precise. Here has been attained, in a perfect way, what intuition attained at earlier stages of development: the abolition of equilibrium that took place at the dissolution of the intuition is no…

=== p.96
DA: …. Og der vil maaske ved Hjælp af de Domme og Slutninger, som ere formede, kunne bygges en højere Anskuelse, en ‖96‖ Intuition i Spinoza's Betydning, en gennem Eftertanke vunden ny Helhedsopfattelse, i hvilk…
EN: …f unity—intuiting and associating—do not lose their significance. They form the involuntary basis that progressing reflection cannot do without. And perhaps, with the help of the judgments and inferences that have been formed, a higher intuition can be built, an intuition in Spinoza's sense, a new comprehension of the whole won through reflection, in which the single thing could be intuited in its connection with the larger whole to which it has shown itself to belong. What value such an intuiting can have will be …

=== p.97
DA: …dning af Sætningen, lader ikke sin fine sproglige Opfattelse faa tilstrækkelig Indflydelse paa den filosofiske ‖97‖ Opfattelse. Han fremhæver træffende Prædikatets overvejende Betydning ved at oversætte „Ve…
EN: … in his logic the expressions ``Sag'' (thing) and ``Tillæg'' (addition). Even Højsgaard, who otherwise sharply distinguishes between the grammatical and the philosophical significance of the sentence, does not let his fine linguistic apprehension gain sufficient influence on the philosophical conception. He aptly emphasizes the predicate's predominant significance by translating ``Verbum'' by ``Hoved-Ord'' (head-word) and adds: ``There is no kind of word that has so important a post in any discourse as the verb has…

=== p.98
DA: …syn til den mere eller mindre fremherskende Rolle, de spille hos de Enkelte. Logiken maa derfor skelne bestemt ‖98‖ mellem selve Tankeforholdet og dets Anskueliggørelse. Tegn, saavel som Ord, ere stedse kun…
EN: …nk, there are nonetheless great individual differences both with respect to which intuitive forms one uses, and with respect to the more or less predominant role they play in individuals. Logic must therefore distinguish definitely between the thought-relation itself and its being made intuitable. Signs, as well as words, are always only invitations or directions to carry out a certain act of thought. We must therefore always subject our images, analogies, and schemata, as well as our words, to a thorough critique,…

=== p.99
DA: …Et første Subjekt kan da ikke findes. Men ligesaalidt kan der findes et sidste afsluttende Prædikat. Ethvert ‖99‖ Prædikat kan igen blive Subjekt, eller det ved et Prædikat bestemte Subjekt kan igen blive…
EN: …A first subject can therefore not be found. But just as little can a last, concluding predicate be found. Every predicate can in turn become subject, or the subject determined by a predicate can in turn become the basis for a new formation of judgment. Our thought moves constantly from a more or less indefinite basis toward a complete determination, which nonetheless const…

=== p.100
DA: …Engelske Psykologer have stærkt fremhævet denne oprindelige og uvilkaarlige Tro. Hume lagde især Vægten paa ‖100‖ den Expansion, ved hvilken en Vækkelse, en livlig Bevægelse fra et enkelt Punkt i Bevidsth…
EN: …English psychologists have strongly emphasized this original and involuntary faith. Hume laid the weight especially on the expansion by which an arousal, a lively movement from a single point in consciousness, can spread to the whole state; under the influence of a strong sensation or feeling we are inclined to place trust in all representations that hang together with them; they get a share in the latter's life and strength. Bain has laid weight especially on the original motor tendency, the urge for movement, that makes us often act on representatio…

=== p.102
DA: …Jeg bruger her Ordet Kvalitet, ligesom hvor Talen var om ‖102‖ den simpleste Art af Genkendelse, for at betegne det aldeles Umiddelbare og Uvilkaarlige,…
EN: …I here use the word quality, as where the talk was of the simplest kind of recognition, to designate the wholly immediate and involuntary, ultimately indescribable feature of a state or an object, and in order to exclude the tendency that, both as regards recognition and existence-assurance, makes itself felt to read…

=== p.103
DA: …en tydeligere Anskuelse eller til en Dom, saa at en klar Sammenligning mellem det Forventede og det Indtrufne ‖103‖ kan finde Sted. Her kan da ske Et af To. Enten kan Forventningens Indhold miste Existentia…
EN: …cure expectation, by reason of the opposition to what actual experience shows, is formed into a more distinct intuition or into a judgment, so that a clear comparison between the expected and the occurred can take place. Here one of two things can then happen. Either the content of the expectation can lose the existential character and pass over to becoming ``mere'' representational content, a representation of something ``merely'' possible, indeed perhaps of something impossible, or at least of something whose tim…

=== p.104
DA: …g Sammenhæng mellem dem, saa at der kan sluttes fra det ene til det andet. Alt Existerende maa tilsidst udgøre ‖104‖ en stor Totalitet, hvis Led slutte sig sammen paa naturlig, eller endog nødvendig Maade. I…
EN: …he different inferences, and the different individuals must agree and show themselves compatible, preferably in such a way that a law-governed connection shows itself between them, so that one can infer from the one to the other. All that exists must ultimately constitute a great totality whose members join together in a natural, or even necessary, way. Illusions and hallucinations, dreams and fantasies, speculations and intimations must, even where they appear with the most vivid existence-quality, give way to the…

=== p.105
DA: …Den lovmæssige Sammenhæng er den nyere Videnskabs Virkelighedskriterium. Saaledes siger Galilei: „Kendemærket ‖105‖ paa, hvad der er naturligt og sandt, (la proprietá e condizione delle cose naturale e vere…
EN: …The law-governed connection is the criterion of reality of the more recent science. Thus Galileo says: ``The mark of what is natural and true (la proprietà e condizione delle cose naturale e vere) is not merely that no self-contradiction is present; nor merely that an easy transition can be made from the one to the other; but it consists in the transition's taking place…

=== p.106
DA: …gaaet af den Anvendelse af Virkelighedskriteriet, som til given Tid er mulig, nu kan blive et Prædikatsbegreb, ‖106‖ idet Eftertanken undersøger, hvorvidt det kan finde Anvendelse paa det enkelte foreliggend…
EN: …n ever be won. The concept of reality is constantly in its becoming. But this does not exclude that this concept, having emerged from the application of the criterion of reality that is possible at a given time, can now become a predicate-concept, in that reflection investigates how far it can find application to the single object at hand. Only now do proper existence-judgments become possible. The concept existence is formed in a way analogous to that in which the concept likeness is formed. Sensations and represe…

=== p.107
DA: …ge Linie; Eftertanken maa begynde med at forudsætte visse Emners Realitet og prøve de andre i Forhold til dem. ‖107‖ Vor Tanke maa have et Sted at staa paa, og først paa et senere Stadium af Eftertanken kan…
EN: …ertain definite objects that form starting-points for reflection in its striving to apply the criterion of reality. All objects do not stand on the same line; reflection must begin by presupposing the reality of certain objects and testing the others in relation to them. Our thought must have a place to stand, and only at a later stage of reflection can this place itself be drawn into the discussion, namely when another starting-point has been won. The beginning-point is in a certain sense accidental; it is perhaps…

=== p.108
DA: …Personlighed og for hver enkelt historisk given Menneskegruppe den Forudsætning, paa hvilken Vurderingen i det ‖108‖ Enkelte, Fastsættelsen af de enkelte Værdier hver for sig, hviler. Først under Eftertanken…
EN: …em conditions the validity of all other values. Such values we can call fundamental values. A fundamental value denotes, for each individual personality and for each individual historically given group of men, the presupposition on which valuation in the particular case, the fixing of the individual values each by itself, rests. Only in reflection's further development can the fundamental value itself be drawn into the discussion—but this will presuppose that a new fundamental value has developed and consolidated i…

=== p.110
DA: …har vist sig i det Foregaaende, sin egen Metafysik, som er et Udviklingsresultat, der snart fremmer, snart hæm ‖110‖ mer det individuelle Tankeliv. Og Sproget, saavel som det Tankeindhold, der er nedlagt der…
EN: … essentially language is nonetheless a social inheritance into which the single individual lives himself. In it many representations and points of view are already arranged. It has, as has already shown itself in the foregoing, its own metaphysics, which is a result of development that now promotes, now inhibits the individual life of thought. And language, as well as the thought-content deposited in it and the thought-forms developed through it, has itself developed in connection with the whole social life in fami…

=== p.111
DA: …e absolut, ligesaalidt som iøvrigt den sociale Indflydelse nogensinde kan være absolut. Naar det er saa let at ‖111‖ paavise den sociale Indflydelse paa Aandsudviklingen i tidligere Perioder, har dette for e…
EN: …iry in the domain of psychology and sociology shows this. Sociology itself would not be possible if such a liberation had not taken place, which of course can never be absolute, any more than, for that matter, the social influence can ever be absolute. When it is so easy to demonstrate the social influence on spiritual development in earlier periods, this has for no small part its simple explanation in the fact that the individual influences are forgotten. One has the products left, but the factors have vanished, a…

=== p.112
DA: …en Gang som ejendommeligt Led og dog „ophævet“ i den „højere Enhed“, som omslutter alle Modsætninger i sig. De ‖112‖ enkelte Trin i denne Udvikling belyses ved Exempler og Typer dels af individuel, dels af s…
EN: …tes (1807) Hegel showed how cognition begins with the single and isolated thing, but is from there driven forward step by step through the contradictions in which it becomes entangled. Through step-by-step development thought unfolds its essence and shows itself to be an ideal totality within which everything single can find its place, at once as a peculiar member and yet ``sublated'' in the ``higher unity'' that encloses all oppositions in itself. The individual stages in this development are illuminated by examples and types, partly of individual, partly of social kind. But it is Hegel's view that only the thought that can unfold on the basis of what the history of spirit has brought about will have the conditions for exercising a significant work. The ``Spirit'' whose history of manifestation (Phenomenology) he describes in his work is the spirit of the human race, in which the indivi…

=== p.113
DA: …eller den haaber, at dens Vanskeligheder ville falde bort ved nye Erfaringer. Om der ad disse Veje stedse vil ‖113‖ kunne naas „højere Enheder“, mere omfattende Enhedsanskuelser, saaledes som Hegel mente, e…
EN: …s or oppositions in the hitherto given, or between the prevailing interpretation and the given. Thought is shaken in its accustomed interpretation by new experiences, or it hopes that its difficulties will fall away through new experiences. Whether by these paths ``higher unities,'' more comprehensive unified intuitions, can always be reached, as Hegel held, is a matter in itself, which will be discussed later. And whether Comte is right in the sharp difference he sets up between three stages in cognition, the theo…

=== p.114
DA: …en under sig, ikke blot hvor han virkeligt griber handlende ind, men ogsaa ved det blotte Ønske, tilkendegivet ‖114‖ ved Ord eller Ceremonier. Eller rettere, Forskellen mellem Handling, Ord og Ceremoni exist…
EN: …experience of dependence, there goes, according to Frazer, a period in which man has trust in his will's power to such a degree that he believes he can bend nature under himself, not only where he really intervenes actively, but also by mere wishing, made known by word or ceremonies. Or rather, the difference between action, word, and ceremony does not exist for man at this stage. It is experience of the will's limitation that leads beyond this stage, and it is likewise this that leads into the world of cognition. …

=== p.116
DA: …og intellektuelle Elementer, eller, om man vil, mellem religiøse Erfaringer og andre Erfaringer. Naar man ved ‖116‖ religiøs Erfaring forstaar den Maade, hvorpaa det menneskelige Følelsesliv stemmes gennem…
EN: …During this whole process there is a reciprocal action between religious and intellectual elements, or, if one will, between religious experiences and other experiences. When by religious experience one understands the way in which the human life of feeling is attuned through what is experienced with respect to the fate of human purposes and ideals under the course of things, then this experience will contribute much to the way in wh…

=== p.117
DA: …gges ikke naturvidenskabelig Forklaring; selve det uendelige Rum, Matematiken forudsætter, er Guds Sanseorgan, ‖117‖ Organet for hans Allestedsnærværelse. Linné udledte de forskellige Arter af organiske Væse…
EN: …ssible ``perfection.'' The solar system's harmonious structure and other purposive natural arrangements are, according to Newton, due to God's intervention and are not subjected to natural-scientific explanation; the infinite space itself that mathematics presupposes is God's sense-organ, the organ for his omnipresence. Linnaeus derived the different species of organic beings from just as many different divine acts of creation, and Kant found in the concept of time the only possible solution of the great problem se…

=== p.118
DA: …er i, at det ene Emne kommer til at belyse det andet. Der er altsaa en stadig Vexelvirkning mellem Erfaring og ‖118‖ Tydning. I hvert enkelt Tilfælde er der nogle Emner eller Erfaringer, der skulle tydes, og…
EN: …ween the given and its interpretation, since every interpretation ultimately builds on something that is itself given. Interpretation consists at all stages in the one object's coming to illuminate the other. There is thus a constant reciprocal action between experience and interpretation. In each single case there are some objects or experiences that are to be interpreted, and others that serve for interpretation. This was, in Comte's view, to be the characteristic of the ``positive'' stage, but it is in reality c…

=== p.119
DA: …melse af deres Ligheder og Forskelle, kaldte Platon Dialektik, og Dialektikeren maatte have Evne til sammenfat ‖119‖ tende Overskuen (ὁ μὲν γὰρ συνοπτικὸς διαλεκτικός, ὁ δὲ μὴ οὔ. Staten 536 C). Der kunde ad…
EN: …eness between large groups of objects and thereby comprehended these in themselves. The discussion of objects that led to sharp determination of their likenesses and differences Plato called dialectic, and the dialectician had to have a capacity for comprehending survey (ὁ μὲν γὰρ συνοπτικὸς διαλεκτικός, ὁ δὲ μὴ οὔ. Republic 536 C). There could by this way be formed a world of Ideas, in which the nature of the objects found its highest expression. The individual things and events arose, changed, and vanished, but t…

=== p.120
DA: …Ideverdenen nærmere. I det store Tog, der i „Fajdros“ drager ud for at beundre Ideerne, de evige Stjerner paa ‖120‖ Tankens Himmel, køre Guderne først. Hermed betegnes der et afgørende Vendepunkt i de relig…
EN: …, in the happiness of beholding them. And this holds for gods as for men. The advantage the gods have is only that they stand nearer to the world of Ideas. In the great procession that in the ``Phaedrus'' sets out to admire the Ideas, the eternal stars in the heaven of thought, the gods drive first. Herewith is denoted a decisive turning-point in the relation of religious representations to scientific thoughts.…

=== p.121
DA: …mme Maade under samme Forhold, Noget, der ikke kunde siges om Animismens Guder. Men Fremskridtet ligger især i ‖121‖ Platonismens Vægt paa det ordnende, efter Ligheder og Forskelle systematiserende Tankearbe…
EN: …Yet it denotes a great advance that the ``Idea'' or the force stands as something that operates constantly, always in the same way under the same conditions, something that could not be said of Animism's gods. But the advance lies especially in Platonism's weight on the ordering thought-work that systematizes according to likenesses and differences. This will always continue to be the first step toward gaining penetrating understanding. From the mere catalogue with its external o…

=== p.122
DA: …ntydede Maade. Det gælder atter her at forbinde Emner gennem Sammenligning. Sammenligningen angaar de bestemte ‖122‖ Betingelser, under hvilke et Emne bliver til eller en Egenskab optræder, Betingelserne for…
EN: …We can use the word Positivism to denote the direction in the life of thought that sets new tasks in the way just intimated. Here again the point is to understand objects through comparison. The comparison concerns the definite conditions under which an object comes to be or a property appears, the conditions for its localization in time or in space or in both respects, and the connection is to give the unavoidable historical succession as determined by a law. Every event is thus att…

=== p.124
DA: …er, saaledes som den i det Foregaaende er skildret, for en Del sammen med Modsætningen mellem antik og modérne ‖124‖ Tænkning. Men det vil tjene til nærmere Belysning af den menneskelige Tankes Natur, naar v…
EN: …46. The opposition between the second and the third stage, as it has been described in the foregoing, coincides in part with the opposition between ancient and modern thinking. But it will serve for the closer illumination of the nature of human thought if we give a more thorough characterization of this opposition. It can be summed up under two points of view. Ancient thinking has a predominantly formal character; on this rests…

=== p.125
DA: …nder alle de stridende Modsætninger dog er Noget, som er konstant, nemlig Loven, Tilværelsens evige Grundtanke ‖125‖ (λόγος), der bestaar under den stadige Skiften af alle Fænomener. Og Demokritos opstillede…
EN: …oser connection with the objects' difference and change. Heraclitus maintained that in all the constant streaming and under all the conflicting oppositions there is nonetheless something that is constant, namely the law, existence's eternal fundamental thought (λόγος), which subsists under the constant change of all phenomena. And Democritus set up the proposition that one reaches a true understanding only when one disregards all the qualitative differences that the senses show us, and explains everything by the re…

=== p.126
DA: …s Erfaringsvidenskab kom for største Delen ikke ud over Opsamling af mere eller mindre nøjagtige Iagttagelser. ‖126‖ Demokritos og Platon ere de klassiske græske Tænkere, og mod dem begge blev der i Oldtiden…
EN: …The Greek concept of science is predominantly formal. True science was for the Greeks logic and mathematics; their empirical science for the most part did not get beyond the collection of more or less exact observations. Democritus and Plato are the classical Greek thinkers, and against them both there was in antiquity directed the objection that they set aside and rejected what the senses teach (τὰ αἰσθητά), and kept merely to what pure thought grasps (μόνοις ἑπόμενοι τοῖς νοητοῖς). Both Democ…

=== p.127
DA: …aa i Tankens faste og konstante Former, udtrykte i Almenbegreberne, et Sidestykke dertil. Baade den synlige og ‖127‖ den usynlige Uforanderlighed omfattedes med religiøs Ærefrygt, som et Tilhold under Tingen…
EN: …d's mutability, that first opened the view for the possibility of science. Here one found the self-identical being realized. And one found then, in thought's firm and constant forms, expressed in the general concepts, a counterpart to it. Both the visible and the invisible unchangeableness were embraced with religious awe, as a refuge under the change of things. A peculiar religious type makes itself felt here—but in remarkable connection with a physical and a logical ideal. The presupposition that the unchangeable…

=== p.128
DA: …Foranderlighedens Verden. Tyge Brahes „nye Stjerne“, som saa pludseligt dukkede op i Uforanderlighedens Sfære, ‖128‖ frembød desuden Forandringer baade i Lysstyrke og Farve, og hans Undersøgelser om Kometern…
EN: … and for all. And experience itself now led to the discovery that one had drawn in far too external a way the boundary between the world of unchangeableness and that of changeableness. Tycho Brahe's ``new star,'' which so suddenly emerged in the sphere of unchangeableness, moreover presented changes both in brightness and color, and his investigations of the comets showed that these apparently so capricious beings did not move about in the sublunary world, but on the contrary traveled through the ether-world higher…

=== p.129
DA: …aade ved deres Forhold til det, Erfaringen viste, medens der omvendt ud fra Erfaringen kunde formuleres stedse ‖129‖ mere nøjagtige Almensætninger. Tænkningen kunde nu beskrive en Bue fra Erfaring gennem Slu…
EN: …uction, could now work into each other's hands, in that the inferences drawn from general propositions could, by reason of the quantitative formulation, be tested in an exact way by their relation to what experience showed, while conversely, from experience, ever more exact general propositions could be formulated. Thinking could now describe an arc from experience through inference to new experience. Ancient thinking really knew only the first part of this arc. When it had found a starting-point for its abstractio…

=== p.130
DA: …, der udtrykke bestemte Forhold mellem bestemte Forandringer. Gennem saadanne Domme vil — i Kraft af Vexelvirk ‖130‖ ningsforholdet mellem Begreb og Dom — Begrebsdannelsen igen kunne opnaa større Fuldkommenh…
EN: …nd which led to the formation of a world of Ideas as the expression of true reality. But for modern thinking the point is to find judgments that express definite relations between definite changes. Through such judgments—by virtue of the relation of reciprocal action between concept and judgment—concept-formation will in turn be able to attain greater perfection.…

=== p.131
DA: …e Tids Tænkning, — selvom en senere Tids Logik i flere Henseender har maattet slaa ind paa andre Veje. Særligt ‖131‖ maa fremhæves, at Leibniz ikke bragte sin Logik i Forbindelse med en Kategorilære, og derv…
EN: …s through equations and substitutions. Leibniz's identity-logic is thus a characteristic expression of the more recent time's thinking—even though a later time's logic has in several respects had to strike out on other paths. It must especially be emphasized that Leibniz did not bring his logic into connection with a doctrine of categories, and thereby came to overlook that there are many other relations than identity that can be of great significance for the thought-work (even though they can all be purely formall…

=== p.132
DA: …t Fænomens Afhængighed af et andet, behøver man vel ikke at opgive Begrebet Kraft, men dette faar den bestemte ‖132‖ Betydning at betegne det i det forudgaaende Fænomen, der indeholder Grunden til det følgen…
EN: … itself far beyond the Middle Ages, one lived high on that kind of word-explanation. When it is first and foremost a matter of finding a law, that is, a judgment that states one phenomenon's dependence on another, one need not indeed give up the concept force, but this gets the definite meaning of denoting that in the preceding phenomenon which contains the ground for the following phenomenon's setting-in—the peculiarity of a phenomenon that from it one can infer another's setting-in. Leibniz is clear that the conc…

=== p.133
DA: …rmale til de reale, des vanskeligere bliver Loverkendelsen, des mere stanse vi ved blot Erfaring uden at kunne ‖133‖ gennemføre Vexelvirkningen af Deduktion og Induktion. Den logiske Lov om det omvendte Forh…
EN: …By degrees, as we in the series of the sciences pass over from the formal to the real, the more difficult the cognition of law becomes, the more we stop at mere experience without being able to carry through the reciprocal action of deduction and induction. The logical law of the inverse relation between concepts' content and extension shows itself here in its great significance: the simpler the objects we face, the easier it is to form con…

=== p.134: no English counterpart found (place by hand)

=== p.136
DA: …evidsthed anvendes af Tænkningen paa de forskellige Omraader, hvor den arbejder, og føre dem tilbage til visse ‖136‖ indbyrdes beslægtede og dog hver for sig ejendommelige Grundformer.…
EN: …a fundamental concept, and the doctrine of categories sets itself the task of gathering and ordering the predicates that with greater or lesser degree of consciousness are applied by thinking in the different domains where it works, and tracing them back to certain mutually kindred and yet each individually peculiar fundamental forms.…

=== p.137
DA: …— Sansning, Erindring eller Fantasi. I Anskuelsen ordnes Emnerne uvilkaarligt i os og for os, og allerede ved ‖137‖ Anskuelsens Tilblivelse virker den psykiske Energi, der senere kan fremtræde i Domsdannels…
EN: …52. Judgment is, as we have seen, not the first form in which objects appear to us. Judgment presupposes intuiting—sensation, memory, or imagination. In intuition the objects are involuntarily ordered in us and for us, and already at the coming-into-being of intuition there operates the psychic energy that can later appear in the formation of judgment. In intuition, whether it is sensation, memory, or imagination, a multiplicity is involuntarily ordered; a form of wholeness is brought about. Th…

=== p.139
DA: …kan da kun have Gyldighed for et vist Stadium i Erkendelsens Udvikling. Den har sin væsentlige Betydning i at ‖139‖ være en Opgørelse, der kan føre til klar Forstaaelse af Problemerne.…
EN: …g of the basis, or because hitherto unheeded objects or elements draw attention to themselves. A presentation of the doctrine of categories can then have validity only for a certain stage in the development of cognition. It has its essential significance in being a stocktaking that can lead to a clear understanding of the problems.…

=== p.140
DA: …g. Man ser da i den menneskelige Aands Grundbegreber en umiddelbar Aabenbaring af Tilværelsens inderste Væsen. ‖140‖ Den platoniske Idelære er det største Exempel paa denne Antagelse, der senere fremtræder u…
EN: …ines, there appears in the history of thinking a constant tendency to give the doctrine of categories without further ado a metaphysical significance. One then sees in the fundamental concepts of the human spirit an immediate revelation of existence's innermost essence. The Platonic doctrine of Ideas is the greatest example of this assumption, which later appears under various forms, not only in philosophers like Spinoza and Hegel, but also in natural scientists like Newton (especially in his concept of spatium abs…

=== p.141
DA: …lignen anvendes visse Prædikater, der udtrykke de Forhold som konstateres: Væren og Ikke-Væren, Lighed og Ulig ‖141‖ hed, Identitet og Forskel, Talbegreber: Det er ved Anvendelse af de i disse Begreber udtry…
EN: …g, as surely as it can have sensations of different kinds and compare them among themselves. And by this very combining and comparing certain predicates are applied, which express the relations that are ascertained: Being and Not-being, likeness and unlikeness, identity and difference, number-concepts. It is by the application of the forms expressed in these concepts that thought ascends from the objects to the Ideas, and the named concepts are therefore themselves the most fundamental Ideas. (Theaetetus p. 185–187…

=== p.142
DA: …skulde jo netop være det, der skulde bestemmes ved Prædikater. I Modsætning til Platon lægger Aristoteles stor ‖142‖ Vægt paa dette stadige Grundlag, medens Platon glemmer det i sin Begejstring for de Ideer,…
EN: … the thought-work itself and therefore prior to this cannot have any determination. Every positive determination would already be a predicate, and the ``essence'' was to be precisely that which was to be determined by predicates. In opposition to Plato, Aristotle lays great weight on this constant basis, while Plato forgets it in his enthusiasm for the Ideas, which were yet really its predicates. Here shows itself the realistic character of Aristotle's philosophy. He has a sharp eye for the fact that thought always…

=== p.143
DA: …en af Platon til Grund lagte sammenfattende og sammenlignende Tankevirksomhed. Baade Kvalitet, Kvantitet og de ‖143‖ noget utydelige sex sidste Kategorier vilde ved nærmere Betragtning kunne bringes ind unde…
EN: …ples he names equality and inequality of magnitude, numerical relations, cause and effect, cognition and the cognized. These are relations that have their root precisely in the combining and comparing thought-activity taken as basis by Plato. Both Quality, Quantity, and the other nine categories could, on closer consideration, be brought under the category of relational determinacy, and it will later show itself that in the more recent time attempts have been made to set up Relation as the first, most comprehensive…

=== p.146
DA: …Foruden Kontinuiteten er der endnu et Begreb, der kon ‖146‖ sekvent burde have havt Plads i Kant's Kategorilære, nemlig Begrebet Relation (Forholdsbes…
EN: …Besides continuity there is yet a concept that consistently ought to have had a place in Kant's doctrine of categories, namely the concept of Relation (relational determinacy). It is seen from Kant's notes to the ``Kritik der reinen Vernunft'' (the ``Reflexionen'' published by Benno Erdmann) that it was by occupying…

=== p.147
DA: …kelner han skarpt mellem Kategorier, der stedse anvendes paa endelige, begrænsede Forhold, og „Ideer“ (tildels ‖147‖ i en anden Betydning end den platoniske), der kræve absolut Afslutning af Tankearbejdet i…
EN: …ought works, and although we must ask about the validity of these forms just as much as about the validity of concepts like magnitude and cause.—In the third place, he distinguishes sharply between categories, which are always applied to finite, limited relations, and ``Ideas'' (partly in another sense than the Platonic), which demand absolute conclusion of the thought-work in a comprehension of the whole. He overlooks that the categories too really make ideal demands on our thought-work. When are the concepts of m…

=== p.148
DA: …Den Kategori, der er altbestemmende hos Hegel, er en, der hos Aristoteles kun var en blandt mange, men som vil ‖148‖ vise sig at være den, der mest umiddelbart hænger sammen med Tankens Natur: Forholdsbestem…
EN: …The category that is all-determining in Hegel is one that in Aristotle was only one among many, but that will show itself to be the one that most immediately hangs together with the nature of thought: relational determinacy, relation. Contradiction comes forth in Hegel only through one's treating a concept's content without regard to the relations that determine and limit i…

=== p.149
DA: …nedlægger sit Arbejde) kommer i Hegels Tankeverden ikke først men sidst — netop fordi den er den rigeste, mest ‖149‖ konkrete Kategori, den, der i sin Forholdsbestemthedslov indeholder alle andre Kategorier…
EN: …Reflection itself (and the concepts or Ideas in which it deposits its work) comes in Hegel's world of thought not first but last—precisely because it is the richest, most concrete category, the one that in its law of relational determinacy contains all other categories in itself. His logical system looks, by virtue of the law of the triad, thus:…

=== p.150
DA: …n Indsigt ud over det hidtil Foreliggende, en Tendens, der er af saa stor Betydning for Aandslivets Udvikling. ‖150‖ —…
EN: …olly new categories. And reflection can also be driven forward to conjectures or new seeking by a tendency to expansion, to extend won insight beyond the hitherto given, a tendency that is of such great significance for the development of the life of the spirit.—…

=== p.151
DA: …at den er Udtryk for vor Endelighed. Han fremhæver ikke, at enhver positiv Erkendelse og Forstaaelse, ethvert ‖151‖ Fremskridt i vor Viden beror paa, at flere Forhold paavises og drages ind med i Betragtnin…
EN: …peculiar to Hamilton's conception, as to that of other Kantians, is that the law of relation is conceived especially as entailing a limitation—that it is the expression of our finitude. He does not emphasize that every positive cognition and understanding, every advance in our knowledge, rests on more relations being demonstrated and drawn into consideration, and on each single relation being determined with greater exactness.…

=== p.152
DA: …Kant's Indflydelse i Kategorilæren. I hans Liste over Kategorier staar Relationen først. Den kundgør sig i Tan ‖152‖ kens skelnende, identificerende og bestemmende Virksomhed, en Virksomhed, der ogsaa er afg…
EN: …In Charles Renouvier, the most important representative of critical philosophy in France, both Comte's and Kant's influence is traced in the doctrine of categories. In his list of categories Relation stands first. It makes itself known in thought's distinguishing, identifying, and determining activity, an activity that is also decisive for all other categories, although Renouvier sets them up alongside the first. A definite principle for the ordering of the categories cannot be seen. The …

=== p.153
DA: …et kom mig ved denne Oversigt især an paa at fremhæve Hovedpunkterne, ved hvilke der jo ogsaa viser sig en vis ‖153‖ Konvergens mellem de forskellige Kataloger. Konvergensen viser sig især i den Vægt, der læ…
EN: …Here too I cannot enter into a closer critique. It was in this survey especially a matter for me of bringing out the chief points, at which there also shows itself a certain convergence between the different catalogues. The convergence shows itself especially in the weight that is laid on consciousness's, especially thinking's, combining or connecting character and, in close connection therewith, on relational determinacy, relation as n…

=== p.154
DA: …, der hænge nærmest sammen med Tænkningens Natur og derfor udtrykke de mest nødvendige Forudsætninger, Emnerne ‖154‖ maa fyldestgøre; de maa derfor ogsaa gælde i det største Omfang. De kunne blot angive de F…
EN: …on of them can be laid out in such a way that we begin with the simplest and proceed to the more rich in content. The simplest will probably be those that hang together most closely with the nature of thinking and therefore express the most necessary presuppositions that the objects must satisfy; they must therefore also hold in the greatest extent. They can merely indicate the demands that must be made at all on every object that is to be able to be thought. The more rich in content a category is, the less compreh…

=== p.155
DA: …s Emnet var et absolut Enkelt, vilde Tanken blive Et med en Stirren og føre til Extase. Selv i det Øjeblik, Be ‖155‖ vidstheden vaagner af det Ubevidste ved Ophævelsen af den Ligevægt, det Ubevidste forudsæt…
EN: …58. What is given as an object for reflection is always a whole, whether this be loose and changing, or firm and lasting. If the object were an absolute single, thought would become one with a staring and lead to ecstasy. Even in the moment consciousness awakens from the unconscious by the abolition of the equilibrium that the unconscious presupposes, the state is determined by the opposition to the preceding state and constitutes a whole with this. Phenomena of consciousness are always determined by a relation…

=== p.156
DA: …Relationen, Forholdsbestemtheden, bliver da den anden ‖156‖ Kategori. Den betegner baade Noget, der uvilkaarligt fremtræder, og et Ideal. Uvilkaarligt…
EN: …Relation, relational determinacy, then becomes the second category. It denotes both something that appears involuntarily and an ideal. Involuntarily, in a consciousness all objects and elements are set in a certain relation to one another. But our reflection seeks to determine this relation as exactly as possible a…

=== p.157
DA: …Det kunde maaske bestrides, at Kontinuiteten i sig selv ‖157‖ er en Relation. Ti forsaavidt den bestaar, kan der jo ikke skelnes mellem Led, der kunne s…
EN: …It might perhaps be disputed that continuity is in itself a relation. For insofar as it subsists, no distinction can be made between members that could stand in relation to one another. When it prevails, consciousness glides imperceptibly forward, seems constantly identical with itself, and it is only the reflection…

=== p.158
DA: …inuum. Naar Eftertanken er vakt, søges der en nærmere Bestemmelse af det empiriske Kontinuum, det uvilkaarlige ‖158‖ Sjæleliv udgør, og det kan kun ske ved at opfatte det som diskontinuerlig Mangfoldighed. D…
EN: …rocesses. (Cf. 5.) Or, as one can also express it, the rational continuum, the continuum formed by reflection, is different from the empirical continuum. When reflection is awakened, a closer determination is sought of the empirical continuum that the involuntary mental life constitutes, and this can only take place by apprehending it as discontinuous multiplicity. Discontinuity is thus not merely a condition for the awakening of reflection; but we seek, when reflection is awakened, to apprehend continuity in analo…

=== p.159
DA: …anvender Eftertanken dem til at forstaaeliggøre sig de kontinuerlige Tilstande og Emner. Der ytrer sig her et ‖159‖ Træk, der stadigt kommer igen i vor Erkendelse, — at en Del eller Side i vor Erfaring beny…
EN: …gy gets its tasks, its resistance to overcome. The differences belong to life, not merely to reflection. And since they present the clearest relations, reflection uses them to make the continuous states and objects intelligible to itself. There expresses itself here a feature that constantly recurs in our cognition—that a part or side in our experience is used to illuminate other parts or sides by way of analogy.…

=== p.161
DA: …lighed (Analogi). (21). De forskellige Arter eller Grader af Forskellighed ville vi i det nærmest Følgende faa ‖161‖ Lejlighed til at omtale, da det er dem, der give Anledning til de speciellere Kategoriers…
EN: …to mention the different kinds or degrees of likeness: identity, congruence (sameness), composite likeness, qualitative likeness, and relational likeness (analogy). (21.) The different kinds or degrees of difference we shall in what immediately follows have occasion to mention, since it is they that give occasion to the appearance of the more special categories.—…

=== p.162
DA: …e Tilfælde til at bestemme, hvilken Gruppe der dannes, — hvilket Emne der udsondres for at bestemmes. — altsaa ‖162‖ hvilken Forskel der gøres; og den medvirker ogsaa ved det Synspunkt, der anlægges paa Emne…
EN: …nd differences. In this breaking there constantly intervenes the interest or the purpose that guides thought. It cooperates in the individual cases in determining which group is formed—which object is separated out to be determined—hence which difference is made; and it cooperates also in the point of view that is taken toward the object. The separated-out object (the group) corresponds to the judgment's subject, the point of view to its predicate. Instead of saying ``this is a tree,'' I could under other condition…

=== p.163
DA: …nsninger og vore Erindringer ere udtømmende. Der er al Grund til at tro, at de stedse ere fragmentariske. Vore ‖163‖ Emner ere stedse begrænsede. Allerede af den Grund vil der kunne tænkes Ordninger eller Ræ…
EN: … whole content of sensation, intuition, and association in the clear form of judgment. And there is also no certainty that our sensations and our memories are exhaustive. There is every ground to believe that they are always fragmentary. Our objects are always limited. Already for this reason orderings or series of an imperfect kind could be thought of, at which thought must nonetheless stop. The doctrine of categories then needs an investigation, an orientation with respect to the in-themselves-possible series of …

=== p.164
DA: …CD er symmetrisk, naar Forholdet mellem D og C er det samme som mellem C og D, ligeledes Forholdet mellem C og ‖164‖ B det samme som mellem B og C o. s. v. En saadan Række kan være intransitiv, nemlig naar N…
EN: … which the relation continues to be the same, whether one goes through the series from the front or from behind. Such a series can be called symmetric. The series ABCD is symmetric when the relation between D and C is the same as between C and D, likewise the relation between C and B the same as between B and C, and so on. Such a series can be intransitive, namely when neighbor-members cannot be exchanged. Because the relation D–C is the same as the relation C–D, it is not said that I can put D in place of C, since…

=== p.165
DA: …Hvor en saadan Række kan dannes, ere vi ved Grænsen ‖165‖ for vor Erkendelse — enten ved dens Begyndelse eller ved dens Ende. Hvis alt Givet, alle E…
EN: …Where such a series can be formed, we are at the limit of our cognition—either at its beginning or at its end. If everything given, all objects and elements, were of such a kind that such series could be formed, cognition would be impossible. Of course there must be an occasion to form the series. The series …

=== p.166
DA: …63. Det Kaotiske begynder at forsvinde, naar det er mu ‖166‖ ligt at danne en Række, i hvilken Forskellighederne variere fra Led til Led, saa at Ledden…
EN: …63. The chaotic begins to disappear when it is possible to form a series in which the differences vary from member to member, so that the members can neither be pushed out nor exchanged, and in which, moreover, no definite direction in the variation can be demonstrated. Such a series can be called an indefinitely vary…

=== p.167
DA: …pørgsmaal — især om Lighedernes og Forskellighedernes Aarsager — endnu staa uløste, kommer man tilbage til den ‖167‖ ubestemt varierende Forskelsrække. Det er Synspunktet, der bestemmer, hvorledes den enkelt…
EN: …red in series according to as essential likenesses or differences as possible. If one lays weight on the fact that even after such an ordering many questions—especially about the causes of the likenesses and differences—still stand unsolved, one comes back to the indefinitely varying difference-series. It is the point of view that determines how the individual series is characterized.…

=== p.168
DA: …betyder da her ikke blot „mindre end“, men betegner ethvert inkonvertibelt, transitivt og asymmetrisk Forhold. ‖168‖ Tids- og Stedsforholdet ere her ikke (som ved Rækkerne (2) og (4)) blotte ydre Synspunkter…
EN: …ter to the earlier, as right to left, as up to down, as the greater to the smaller. Here members can be pushed out, and inference can therefore take place: when B lies to the right of A and C to the right of B, C lies to the right of A, and so on.—This series can be expressed thus: [ A < B < C < D (5). ] The sign $<$ then here does not merely mean ``less than,'' but denotes any inconvertible, transitive, and asymmetric relation. The relation of time and of place are here not (as in series (2) and (4)) mere outer points of view or principles of ordering; reflection is here directed toward the very relation of time and of space as such.…

=== p.169
DA: …s under (5) ligesaavel som under (6). Og Række (5) kan undertiden formuleres som partiel Identitetsrække, idet ‖169‖ Delen jo er identisk med en Del af Helheden, det Mindre med en Del af det Større. Men det…
EN: … the subject is subordinated (subsumed) under the predicate's extension as part under whole (cf. 33), a chain of judgments can be brought under (5) as well as under (6). And series (5) can sometimes be formulated as a partial identity-series, since the part is, after all, identical with a part of the whole, the smaller with a part of the greater. But it then becomes a series that runs in the opposite direction from (6), for in (6) it is conversely the following member that is comprised in the preceding. In the tran…

=== p.170
DA: …en Henseende eller i alle Henseender falde bort ved nærmere Undersøgelse, faa vi en absolut Identitetsrække: [ ‖170‖ A = B = C = D (8). ] Hvor en saadan Række kan dannes, viser det sig, at de givne Forskelli…
EN: …69. If the differences in one respect or another, or in all respects, fall away on closer investigation, we get an absolute identity-series: [ A = B = C = D (8). ] Where such a series can be formed, it shows itself that the given differences were disguised identities. Such a series is at once symmetric, transitive, and convertible. It can be read from behind as well as from the front; the members can be exchanged; a…

=== p.172
DA: …hinanden. Endnu mere udpræget og dogmatisk fremtræder Identiteten som Ideal hos Parmenides, Platon og Spinoza. ‖172‖…
EN: …gularly varying difference-series, cannot be reduced to disguised identities. Leibniz's logic and his doctrine of monads stand in sharp opposition to each other. Still more pronounced and dogmatic does identity appear as ideal in Parmenides, Plato, and Spinoza.…

=== p.173
DA: …d sit Forhold til alle andre Led; intet kan skydes ud, men alle kunne ombyttes. Saaledes f. Ex. den Række, der ‖173‖ dannes af de tre Vinkelspidser i et ligesidet Triangel; enhver har samme Afstand fra begge…
EN: … one can, in closed series of several members, have both convertibility and intransitivity. Every member is then determined by its relation to all other members; none can be pushed out, but all can be exchanged. Thus, e.g., the series formed by the three vertices in an equilateral triangle; each has the same distance from both the others. The series of the Decemvirs is closed; none can be pushed out; but the members can be exchanged arbitrarily, provided only that one says of each single Decemvir what can also be s…

=== p.174
DA: …Forskels- og Lighedsrækker. Vi maa da ogsaa tage Hensyn til andre Muligheder end dem, der gøre rationel Tænken ‖174‖ mulig. En kaotisk Forskelsrække vilde endog gøre den umulig.…
EN: …al ones. It is precisely our task to orient ourselves with respect to the question whether and how far it is possible to form firm series of difference and likeness. We must then also take into account other possibilities than those that make rational thinking possible. A chaotic difference-series would even make it impossible.…

=== p.175
DA: …r gør Brug af saadanne Rækker, som gøre Slutning mulig. Da enhver Værdi kan siges at indeholde en Fordring, et ‖175‖ Ideal, nemlig enten Opnaaelse, Bevarelse eller Udvikling af det Værdifulde, kunne vi kalde…
EN: …come objects for thought. The question becomes whether there is also, for such objects, a possibility of a rational thinking, that is, of a thinking that makes use of such series as make inference possible. Since every value can be said to contain a demand, an ideal, namely either attainment, preservation, or development of the valuable, we can call the fundamental concepts applicable to this class of objects the ideal categories.…

=== p.176
DA: …vis Identitet mellem Udgangsforestilling og Slutforestilling kan ingen Dom dannes. Slutning, endeligt, er kun ‖176‖ mulig ved Substitution, ved Identitet af Begreber, der forekomme i forskellige Domme.…
EN: …s must in one respect or another be able to be regarded as identical, in order for us to be able to form a common concept for them. And without a certain identity between initial representation and final representation no judgment can be formed. Inference, finally, is possible only by substitution, by identity of concepts that occur in different judgments.…

=== p.177
DA: …ende Forskelsrække, partiel og absolut Identitetsrække. Selv den kaotiske Forskelsrække kan udlægges som en Ar ‖177‖ t af (5): danne A, B, C og D en kaotisk Forskelsrække, véd jeg, at da A er forskellig fra…
EN: … between the members two and two can be reversed and yet are identical.—Rationality's schema is $a = b = a $, corresponding to the progressive difference-series, the partial and the absolute identity-series. Even the chaotic difference-series can be interpreted as a kind of (5): if A, B, C, and D form a chaotic difference-series, I know that since A is different from C, it is also different from D. It is a ray of rationality down into the chaos of differences.…

=== p.178
DA: …til Begrebet Identitet. Den er en analytisk Definition, idet vi gaa fra et større Hele (Ligheden overhovedet) ‖178‖ til en Del eller Art (Identiteten), ligesom naar vi i Geometrien definere Punktet ved Lini…
EN: …ness, since not all such can be used for the function so important for the thought-work that substitution is. It also shows the way by which we reach the concept of identity. It is an analytic definition, in that we go from a larger whole (likeness in general) to a part or kind (identity), just as when in geometry we define the point by the line, the line by the surface, the surface by the solid.…

=== p.179
DA: …n er al Tro, der ikke falder sammen med hans egen (positive eller negative) Tro, ligegyldig. Intellektuelt set ‖179‖ er Identiteten et mægtigt Tankevaaben overfor Mangfoldighedens Forvirring.…
EN: …If I have a purpose that for me is one and all, everything that does not serve this purpose stands as identical, as indifferent. For the fanatic, all belief that does not coincide with his own (positive or negative) belief is indifferent. Intellectually regarded, identity is a mighty weapon of thought against the confusion of multiplicity.…

=== p.180
DA: …ikke af den blotte Forskel mellem de Tider og Steder, hvor de ske, men kun af Forskelle i vedkommende Legemers ‖180‖ Art, Form eller Bevægelse". Oldtiden talte derimod om „naturlige Steder".…
EN: …e's exact natural science. It is formulated in the following way by Maxwell: ``The difference between two events does not depend merely on the mere difference between the times and places where they occur, but only on differences in the nature, form, or motion of the bodies concerned''. Antiquity, on the other hand, spoke of ``natural places.''…

=== p.181
DA: …74. Hvor Substitution ikke er mulig, blive Mangfoldigheden og Forskellighederne staaende. Alle Forskelle ere ‖181‖ umiddelbart Kvalitetsforskelle, idet Ordet Kvalitet betegner den umiddelbare Ejendommeligh…
EN: …74. Where substitution is not possible, the multiplicity and the differences remain standing. All differences are immediately qualitative differences, since the word quality denotes the immediate peculiarity with which an object (something distinguishable) appears in relation to other objects, a peculiarity that can only be described through likenesses and differences to…

=== p.182
DA: …re Kvaliteter, der ikke saa let tilstede klare Rækkedannelser. Vi sammenstille da disse ufuldkomnere Kvalitets ‖182‖ rækker med hine fuldkomnere og kunne derved ad Analogiens Vej naa til større Klarhed over…
EN: …ries-formations. These are time, number, degree, and place. The series that these four qualities each form can then be used to cast light on other qualities that do not so easily permit clear series-formations. We then place these more imperfect quality-series together with those more perfect ones and can thereby, by way of analogy, reach greater clarity about them and perhaps even discover new members in them, hence lengthen them or make them more continuous.…

=== p.183
DA: …n i alle dens Konsekvenser og ved Sammenholden af disse Konsekvenser med Erfaringens Vidnesbyrd. Saaledes blev ‖183‖ det Spørgsmaal afgjort, om Lysets Bevægelse var at opfatte i Analogi med en Bølgebevægelse…
EN: …oncern such questions. In the domain of strict experience such disputes can often be decided by exact carrying-through of the analogy in all its consequences and by holding these consequences together with the testimony of experience. Thus the question was decided whether the movement of light was to be conceived in analogy with a wave-movement (undulation) or in analogy with a hurling-out (emission). In the religious and the metaphysical domain it is both difficult, if not impossible, to carry through the analogie…

=== p.184
DA: …bers Stræben gaar ud paa at føre Naturens Problemer tilbage til Bestemmelse af Størrelser ved Taloperationer." ‖184‖ Og Cournot har udtalt, at Talbegrebet og Begrebet om Gruppering og Ordning høre nøje samme…
EN: …tions of mathematics in science are grounded on relations between the laws of the physical magnitudes and the laws of the whole numbers, so that the endeavor of the exact sciences aims at tracing nature's problems back to the determination of magnitudes by number-operations.'' And Cournot has stated that the concept of number and the concept of grouping and ordering hang closely together; quantity is a kind of quality that can vary continuously and thereby serve for regular determination in a way that no other qual…

=== p.187
DA: …ing og Erindring. Men ogsaa hvor Forventning og Erindring gøre sig gældende, raade kvalitative Forskelle endnu ‖187‖ indenfor Tidsforestillingen. Det vil fra først af især være praktiske Motiver, der medføre…
EN: … is the sensation of change. A representation of time, time as a category, first becomes possible through expectation and memory. But even where expectation and memory make themselves felt, qualitative differences still prevail within the representation of time. It will at first be especially practical motives that entail this representation. If every urge, every wish, were immediately fulfilled, it would scarcely arise. But when there is an interval between the appearance of the urge or purpose and the aimed-at st…

=== p.188
DA: …indredes, kan vække Erindring om en endnu fjernere Tid o. s. v. Skridt for Skridt kan der da foregaa en Udrens ‖188‖ ning af alle kvalitative og praktiske Elementer. Selve denne Udrensning kan være af prakti…
EN: … constantly be expanded by virtue of the same rule according to which it is formed. The attainment can beget new urge, and so on, and the past that was remembered can awaken memory of a still more remote time, and so on. Step by step there can then take place a purging of all qualitative and practical elements. This very purging can be of practical significance through the greater overview and the more definite measuring-out that thereby becomes possible. It can be practical to disregard the practical.…

=== p.189
DA: …lle Øjeblikke ere ens — i kvalitativ og i kvantitativ Henseende. Der maa altsaa være foregaaet en Tankebearbej ‖189‖ delse af Tidsforestillingen, før de matematiske Bestemmelser kunne træde i Kraft. Men paa…
EN: …ment, traverse the same length of path, the times they have needed are said to be equal. But the presupposition here is that all moments are the same—in a qualitative and in a quantitative respect. There must then have taken place an elaboration by thought of the representation of time before the mathematical determinations can come into force. But on account of the tendency to expansion and projection that is peculiar to consciousness, this does not see that time in its fully developed form is in a certain sense i…

=== p.190
DA: …et er udfyldt, — ligegyldigt, om Emnerne eller Øjeblikkene ere ensartede eller forskelligartede, enkelte eller ‖190‖ sammensatte. Saadanne Akter kunne betragtes som identiske, afset fra deres Indhold eller G…
EN: …es of acts of consciousness or of thought is performed, each of which corresponds to an object, no matter what this is, or to a moment, no matter how it is filled—no matter whether the objects or the moments are homogeneous or heterogeneous, single or composite. Such acts can be regarded as identical, apart from their content or objects. Herein lies the possibility of the concept of number.…

=== p.191
DA: …rt, som de, der førte fra Nr. 1 til Nr. 8. Derved defineres Begrebet 8 paa flere forskellige Maader, ikke blot ‖191‖ blot som $7+1$, men ogsaa f. Ex. som $100 92$. Det viser sig herved tydeligt, at de forske…
EN: … more or fewer acts are required in the different cases, and that the direction can be different. These acts are of the same kind as those that led from No. 1 to No. 8. Thereby the concept 8 is defined in several different ways, not merely as $7+1$, but also, e.g., as $100 92$. It shows itself hereby distinctly that the different acts of thought are really only repetitions of one and the same act of thought—that they are identical among themselves, independent of the place in the identically varying series as well …

=== p.192
DA: …og Matematiken idethele, fra Logiken. Rent logisk er, som Leibniz viste, $A + A = A$, eller som Boole udtrykte ‖192‖ det: $x^2 = x$. Et Begrebs Indhold eller Omfang kan ikke ændres ved Gentagelse. En Hest er…
EN: …It is the positive significance of repetition that separates the theory of numbers, and mathematics as a whole, from logic. Purely logically, as Leibniz showed, $A + A = A$, or as Boole expressed it: $x^2 = x$. A concept's content or extension cannot be changed by repetition. A horse is a horse, however many horses there may be. But mathematically $A + A = 2A$ (or $A < A^2$). The concept of number comes into being by a synthesis o…

=== p.193
DA: …ning end den dobbelte Retning, der betegnes ved de positive og de negative Tals Række, — sidelængs, istedetfor ‖193‖ fremad eller tilbage — faas de imaginære Tals Række (symboliseret ved en paa den sædvanlig…
EN: …d counting—by fractions and by the approximate number-values to which attempts to determine irrational relations lead. If the number-formation goes in another direction than the double direction denoted by the series of the positive and the negative numbers—sideways, instead of forward or backward—one gets the series of imaginary numbers (symbolized by a line perpendicular to the line of the usual number-series). Ever greater continuity is reached within the series—by differentials of different order—as well as bey…

=== p.195
DA: …mmer, og det er ad Analogiens Vej, det anvendes paa Emnernes oprindeligt kvalitative Forskelligheder. Energien ‖195‖ maales fysisk set ved den Vejlængde, en Masse flyttes. Der dannes saa en Talrække, svarend…
EN: …e height to which the mercury rises in a glass tube. It is from such experiences that the concept of degree of strength stems, and it is by way of analogy that it is applied to the objects' originally qualitative differences. Energy is, physically regarded, measured by the length of path over which a mass is moved. A number-series is then formed, corresponding to the different lengths, and the analogizing can now run its course, in that the number-series won is paralleled with the difference-series of our qualitati…

=== p.196
DA: …aledes kan der ogsaa undertiden (og maaske meget ofte) opstaa en Følelse af Anspændelse og Anstrengelse, der i ‖196‖ Virkeligheden ikke svarer til det psykiske Arbejde, Eftertanken formaar at paavise. Det hø…
EN: …r sensation of warmth often seems to us to have a far greater ``strength'' than the degree of warmth that has in fact been present, so there can also sometimes (and perhaps very often) arise a feeling of exertion and effort that in reality does not correspond to the psychic work that reflection is able to demonstrate. It belongs to the many possible illusions in the domain of the inner life.—When we speak of spiritual ``progress'' or ``regress,'' the symbolic application of number and of spatial length shows itself…

=== p.197
DA: …Stilling til Solen. Det kan ofte se ud, somom Naturen gjorde Spring; men ethvert saadant Spring indeholder en ‖197‖ Opfordring til at skaffe os en mere omfattende Synskreds. Saaledes opfatte vi Hvilen som m…
EN: …orning is ordered into a continuity when we take account not merely of what is immediately accessible to our observation, but of the earth's rotation and its position relative to the sun. It can often look as if nature made leaps; but every such leap contains a summons to procure for ourselves a more comprehensive field of view. Thus we conceive rest as minimal movement, as a relation of equilibrium between forces, and thereby abolish the leap between rest and movement.…

=== p.198
DA: …else, vedblev Rummet og dets Steder dog at optræde med udpræget kvalitative Forskelligheder, hentede snart fra ‖198‖ den ene, snart fra den anden af de medvirkende Sanser, dog mest fra Bevægelsessansen. Op o…
EN: …Even after it had come to stand clear that it was the ``same'' space that we apprehend by sight, by touch, and by movement, space and its places nonetheless continued to appear with pronounced qualitative differences, fetched now from the one, now from the other of the cooperating senses, though mostly from the sense of movement. Up and down, right and left, forward and backward—these representations originally denoted qualitatively different relations, and they still do so involuntarily in all…

=== p.199
DA: …ældende. Det var, som allerede nævnt (73), paa Renaissancetiden, at denne Udrensning foregik, paa Rummets lige ‖199‖ som paa Tidens Omraade. Tanken om indifferenza della natura blev gennemført. Den er af sto…
EN: …places whose location is to be determined. The identity, or rather the uniformity, of places and stretches begins to make itself felt. It was, as already mentioned (73), in the Renaissance period that this purging took place, in the domain of space as in that of time. The thought of the indifference of nature (indifferenza della natura) was carried through. It is of great significance for research, which thereby got a direction to seek explanations of what happens in nature in another way than by referring to the p…

=== p.200
DA: …eres Interesse ud over Orienteringen i Omverdenen. Ti vi bruge Rumsanskuelsen til at symbolisere alle Forskels ‖200‖ forhold, fordi Rummet, som man med Rette har sagt, er den mest exakte Form for Forskelligh…
EN: …egarded, forms the presupposition of the former, since quantitative comparison presupposes qualitative. Both metric and descriptive geometry have their interest beyond orientation in the surrounding world. For we use the intuition of space to symbolize all relations of difference, because space, as one has rightly said, is the most exact form of difference.…

=== p.201
DA: …blot ingen Grænser kan have for sin Udstrækning, men er et Kontinuum i alle sine mindste Dele, — dette Rum er, ‖201‖ som Kant har sagt, en Ide , d. v. s. en Regel, efter hvilken alle Bevægelser ere at efterf…
EN: …The ``absolute'' space, whose places are qualitatively the same and mutually determine each other to infinity, and which not only can have no limits for its extension, but is a continuum in all its smallest parts—this space is, as Kant has said, an Idea, that is, a rule according to which all movements are to be investigated. It is a rule, then, according to which our measurements and descriptions of space in the individual cases are again and again to be undertaken.…

=== p.202
DA: …re forskellige, er det ene i en eller flere Henseender ikke, hvad det andet er. Og i selve Identitetsforholdet ‖202‖ kan Negtelsen spores. Ti selvom A er identisk med B, saa maa der dog være eller have været…
EN: …een, by the help of analogy be interpreted as identities. From another side, there is contained in every difference a negation. When two objects are different, the one is in one or more respects not what the other is. And in the identity-relation itself negation can be traced. For even if A is identical with B, there must nonetheless be or have been something that made it that they could need an identification, and in that respect there must then also be something that could be asserted of A but had to be denied of…

=== p.203
DA: …Begivenheder i Verden ikke blot hver have deres Ejendommeligheder, men at det Ene ikke er, hvad det Andet er. ‖203‖ Der maa vælges, og der maa resigneres. Men i denne Skole lærtes der ogsaa, hvilket vigtigt…
EN: …and other categories, here too the concept's practical motive precedes the theoretical. Through disappointment and lack, men have learned that things and events in the world not only each have their peculiarities, but that the one is not what the other is. There must be choice, and there must be resignation. But in this school it was also learned what an important means of thought negation is. Classification and induction become possible only by it. (22; 26–28.) Negation operates now as a reference to a later close…

=== p.205
DA: …Prædikatsbestemmelsen. Skøn og Intuition kunne være banebrydende. De kunne føre til Opdagelser, der maaske maa ‖205‖ og kunne begrundes ad helt andre Veje end den, der har ført til dem. Ved Begrundelsen bliv…
EN: … Closer investigation can, however, demonstrate that several different intuitions and associations have cooperated in the formation of judgment and the determination of the predicate. Estimate and intuition can be pathbreaking. They can lead to discoveries that perhaps must and can be grounded by wholly other ways than the one that has led to them. In the grounding it is definitely decided which presuppositions cooperate, and how far their significance reaches.…

=== p.206
DA: …men kan udtrykke, og i Subjektet Mere, end Prædikatet indeholder, saaledes ville Slutsætninger ikke altid inde ‖206‖ holde Alt, hvad Forudsætningerne indeholde. Netop Mellembegreberne, der tilvejebringe den…
EN: …86. Just as there will for the most part be more in intuition than judgment can express, and in the subject more than the predicate contains, so conclusions will not always contain all that the premises contain. Precisely the middle-concepts that bring about the connection sought fall away. It is, as we have seen (71), a wish, a goal, that determines which objects it is whose content we wish determined; the determination takes place by …

=== p.207
DA: …a hverandre. Vi ere da komne ud over de blotte Rækkedannelser, der kunde fortsættes i det Ubestemte. Vi glemme ‖207‖ da ikke Sandhedens Herkomst, naar den engang er kommen til Verden, og Sandheden bliver da…
EN: …s happens when ground and consequence can change places, so that from the conclusion one can always find the premises on which it rests or which it contains. The accidental thing in the way by which the result is reached then falls away; we have a little world, a totality before us, whose members cannot be separated from one another. We are then beyond the mere series-formations, which could be continued into the indefinite. We then do not forget the origin of the truth, once it has come into the world, and truth then does not so easily become a dead treasure. How far and in how great an extent such thought-worlds, logical systems, can be formed is a matter in itself. And a special question becomes whether our whole life of thought can be concluded or rounded off into such a closed whole. The possibility of chaotic difference-series can scarcely ever be excluded; there will, as long as n…

=== p.208
DA: …rfor en Brydning mellem de to Synspunkter og har den Opgave at finde sin Vej gennem denne Brydning. Det er der ‖208‖ for, vi maa gøre en Forskel mellem de formale og de reale Kategorier. Denne Forskel bestem…
EN: … the second point of view, and for him the rationality of existence therefore became an illusion. But our life of thought stands always before a breaking between the two points of view and has the task of finding its way through this breaking. It is therefore that we must make a difference between the formal and the real categories. This difference is determined precisely by the significance of time, which was especially impressed by the transition from ancient to modern thinking (46–50). It necessitates the settin…

=== p.209
DA: …tedse vil optræde noget helt Nyt og Forskelligt. Men det kunde ikke være Forventning om noget aldeles Bestemt, ‖209‖ nemlig om det Samme, der under de samme Forhold til Stadighed var optraadt. At Kaos vil ve…
EN: …The objects must then not form a chaotic difference-series. Even then an expectation could arise—namely that there will constantly appear something wholly new and different. But it could not be an expectation of something wholly definite, namely of the same thing that had constantly appeared under the same conditions. That chaos will continue to be chaos is indeed a knowledge, but a wholly contentless one; it denotes the lower limit of all real operation. Could we not get beyond it, ou…

=== p.210
DA: …er, som jeg et andet Sted har sagt, vort første Møde med Nødvendigheden. Den uundgaaelige Orden i Emnernes Suc ‖210‖ cession udtrykker vort første Aarsagsbegreb.…
EN: …ive or our wish, and we now seek the conditions without which it cannot be reached. Here we in a way experience causality before we think about it. Here is, as I have said elsewhere, our first encounter with necessity. The unavoidable order in the succession of objects expresses our first concept of cause.…

=== p.211
DA: …hold. Herved gør den Brug af Kausalitetsbegrebet, saaledes som dette paa Erkendelsens givne Udviklingstrin for ‖211‖ mer sig. Om Hannibal har levet, og naar han har levet, er væsentligt en Opgave af samme Ar…
EN: …Historically one must often begin merely by establishing the chronology. This can then become the basis for a further-reaching investigation. Historical criticism has first and foremost the task of investigating the reality of the individual events each by itself, as well as their chronological relation. Herein it makes use of the concept of causality, as this forms itself at the given stage of development of cognition. Whether Hannibal has lived, and when he has lived, is essentially a task of the same kind as that whether there has been a primal nebula out of which our solar system has developed. In both cases one infers back from given objects. One constructs the past out of the present and its content. It makes no difference that Hannibal has existed only once; the primal nebula too has existed only once. In every application of th…

=== p.212
DA: …r Stræben kan fortsættes i samme Retning som før, skønt ad en Omvej. Men ogsaa hvor der ikke gør sig praktiske ‖212‖ Motiver gældende, kan Ligevægten ophæves. Optræden af nye Emner eller Forandringer af de f…
EN: …distance between the goal and our present state; it is equalized, and the equilibrium is restored, when we find means and ways by which our striving can be continued in the same direction as before, though by a roundabout way. But also where no practical motives make themselves felt, the equilibrium can be abolished. The appearance of new objects or changes of those at hand more or less abolish the equilibrium in our thoughts; a previously won connection is loosened or burst, and a new one is sought. The intellectu…

=== p.213
DA: …l andre. Der er forsaavidt fra først af et Spring, ikke blot mellem to hinanden afløsende Emner, men ogsaa mel ‖213‖ lem disse Emner tilsammen og andre Emner, som maaske dog ligge i samme Række og i Kontinui…
EN: …servation and of our thought, not of nature. It goes here as with logical inference, where we too grasp a single member in a whole series in order to become clear about its relation to another single member. (71; 86.) The change that gives the impulse to our thinking, our causal thinking too, singles out individual objects in relation to others. There is so far from the first a leap, not only between two objects that replace each other, but also between these objects together and other objects, which nonetheless perhaps lie in the same series and in continuity with them. It is our interest that isolates the cause from what goes before it, and the effect from what follows after it. Both leaps are abolished the more the causal relation can develop from its elementary form, in which it is a successive relation between two qualitatively different objects, to its ideal form, in which it is a …

=== p.214
DA: …ng. Colding fandt den modsatte Antagelse „fornuftstridig", og Joule kaldte den „absurd". Heller ikke Helmholtz ‖214‖ havde Bevidstheden om at opstille en ny Sætning. Heldigvis stansede disse Forskere ikke ve…
EN: …f repeating the proposition causa æquat effectum, which for him was a consequence of ``the law of logical ground''; it was for him a self-evident proposition. Colding found the opposite assumption ``contrary to reason,'' and Joule called it ``absurd.'' Nor did Helmholtz have the consciousness of setting up a new proposition. Fortunately these inquirers did not stop at this consideration, but subjected their view to an experimental testing.…

=== p.215
DA: …nogen Maade er muligt. Det er da ogsaa herpaa Opmærksomheden først og fremmest er rettet indenfor de specielle ‖215‖ Forskningsgrene, og vi maa tage det som en Kendsgerning, at jo nøjagtigere Forholdenes Ide…
EN: …rated, either in nature or in history, it is nonetheless natural that thought seeks to get as far in ascertaining the identity of the relations as is in any way possible. It is then also on this that attention is first and foremost directed within the special branches of research, and we must take it as a fact that the more exactly the identity of the relations can be demonstrated, the more it shows itself that there is equivalence between what goes before and what follows after.…

=== p.216
DA: …Det Bidrag, som et enkelt Emne yder til Lovens Opfyldelse, kaldes dets Kraft. Kraft er, for at bruge Leibniz' ‖216‖ Definition, det i en nuværende Tilstand, der indeholder Grunden, eller en Del af Grunden t…
EN: …The contribution that a single object makes to the fulfillment of the law is called its force. Force is, to use Leibniz's definition, that in a present state which contains the ground, or a part of the ground, of a new state. Force contains in itself no explanation; but the scientific significance of the concept of force lies in its pointing to the fact that it is not onl…

=== p.218
DA: …vægelse. Substansen er et Exempel paa en hendøende, om ikke allerede afdød Kategori. Kant's „Ding an sich" var ‖218‖ en af dens sidste Former. For Sjælelivets Vedkommende har dels Hume, dels Fichte paavist U…
EN: …that the unchangeable and resting was the highest (48; 77), especially with the urge for rest for thought in an Idea that did not again set reflection in motion. Substance is an example of a dying, if not already dead, category. Kant's ``Ding an sich'' was one of its last forms. As regards the mental life, Hume and Fichte have demonstrated the invalidity of the concept of substance: immediate observation does not show us the soul-substance, Hume maintained; and the more we come to know ourselves by way of reflectio…

=== p.219
DA: …rtsatte Løb bevæger sig, — hvilke Led der have Mulighed for her paany at gøre sig gældende. Retning hører lige ‖219‖ saa væsentligt med til en Bevægelse som Masse og Hastighed. Leibniz opstillede derfor, for…
EN: …gy can thus only be experimentally demonstrated when one can form isolated wholes and keep influences from without away. But this is then always ultimately an arbitrary limitation, an abstraction. And the question becomes, when one returns to the real conditions, always in which direction the causal series moves during its continued course—which members have the possibility of here anew making themselves felt. Direction belongs just as essentially to a movement as mass and velocity. Leibniz therefore set up, besides the law of the conservation of force, a law of the conservation of direction. According to the law of inertia, movement does not change its direction, any more than its velocity, except by the influence of outer forces. But even when the direction is changed, the earlier direction is nonetheless cooperative in the new direction, which is the resultant of the earlier direction…

=== p.220
DA: …mindre harmoniske Systemer af Aarsagsrækker eller Virksomhedsretninger danne sig. I hvor stort Omfang dette er ‖220‖ Tilfældet, maa Erfaringen afgøre. Men Erfaringen godtgør, at det kan ske. Og det er derfor…
EN: … that directions diverge; but it must be taken as a fact that this is not always so; directions can be connected, so that wholes, more or less harmonious systems of causal series or directions of activity, form themselves. In how great an extent this is the case, experience must decide. But experience demonstrates that it can happen. And it is therefore that we, through the concept of direction, form the transition from the category of causality to the category of totality. By reason of the originality of direction…

=== p.221
DA: …e eller mindre harmoniske Totaliteter. Totalitet forudsætter derimod Kausalitet. Forholdet mellem Kategorierne ‖221‖ er jo det, at de mere specielle, mere konkrete have et rigere Indhold, men et mindre Omfan…
EN: …ality. One can think the latter without the former, since there can be thought, and perhaps are found, causal series that do not converge, do not lead to more or less harmonious totalities. Totality, on the other hand, presupposes causality. The relation between the categories is, after all, that the more special, more concrete ones have a richer content, but a smaller extension. We therefore unfortunately have no right to generalize the fact that totalities arise. The great question, which in this connection we do…

=== p.222
DA: …rstand præexisterer i selve Elementernes tidligere Retninger. Det er kun for vor tilfældige Opfattelse, at den ‖222‖ bliver til paa én Gang. Den var forud paa Vej — i de forskellige konvergerende Retninger.…
EN: …the whole go before (as plan) or follow after (as result), one embraces an equally external conception. One overlooks how the whole in a certain sense preexists in the very earlier directions of the elements. It is only for our accidental apprehension that it comes to be all at once. It was on the way beforehand—in the different converging directions.…

=== p.223
DA: …Mangfoldighed vil gøre sig gældende ved dem alle. Det er jo Samvirken mellem forskellige Aarsagsrækker, der er ‖223‖ Betingelsen for Totalitet. Derved er der givet et Forhold mellem disse Rækkers Mangfoldigh…
EN: … among themselves, they will be able to be ordered in series according to points of view that lie in the very concept of totality. A relation between unity and multiplicity will make itself felt in them all. It is, after all, the cooperation between different causal series that is the condition for totality. Thereby there is given a relation between these series' multiplicity on the one side and the degree of unity and concentration that the totality presents on the other side. The richer a multiplicity that is gat…

=== p.224
DA: …pede, at alt virkeligt Existerende er et Enkelt og Individuelt, Noget, der stedse kun kan optræde som Subjekt, ‖224‖ aldrig som Prædikat. (Smlgn. 53). Det Individuelle (Totale) staar altsaa som en Skranke fo…
EN: …eady in Aristotle this appears, in that he laid strong weight on the fact that all knowledge concerns general relations, but at the same time impressed that everything really existing is a single and individual thing, something that can always appear only as subject, never as predicate. (Cf. 53.) The individual (total) thus stands as a barrier for cognition. According to the conception we have asserted of the concept of totality, we must find that there is something correct in the Aristotelian conception, only that…

=== p.225
DA: …il. Men denne Modsætning er kun en Gradsforskel. Ogsaa Naturen frembyder Helheder, hvis Historie er begrænset, ‖225‖ og som det er Naturvidenskabens Opgave at forstaa, en Opgave, i hvis Tjeneste de almene Lo…
EN: …he home of the general laws. But in history there is no repetition. Every event and every personality brings something new, exists only once. But this opposition is only a difference of degree. Nature too presents wholes whose history is limited, and which it is the task of natural science to understand, a task in whose service the general laws ultimately step. For Newton it was thus not merely a task to find the laws for the movements of the planets—and ultimately of all material elements; the solar system as a wh…

=== p.226
DA: …ystem af større og mindre Legemer, og Forandringer i det ville medføre Forandringer i Tyngdeforholdene. Det er ‖226‖ stedse et faktisk, historisk Element, som giver enhver Anvendelse af en almindelig Lov den…
EN: … the relation to a definite system within which the movement takes place. The application of the law of gravity in a single case always presupposes a system of larger and smaller bodies, and changes in it will entail changes in the gravitational relations. It is always a factual, historical element that gives every application of a general law its character.…

=== p.228
DA: …andre Ord, jo mere vi kunne opfatte Aarsagsforholdet som Kontinuitet, des mere træder det frem som Udvikling. ‖228‖ Dette er allerede antydet af Kant, men blev især fremhævet af Salomon Maimon i følgende Ud…
EN: …nd, the more we can apply the concept of development, in that the series of the different states of the same object appears with a stamp of unity. In other words, the more we can conceive the causal relation as continuity, the more it steps forth as development. This is already intimated by Kant, but was especially emphasized by Salomon Maimon in the following utterance: ``To ask about a phenomenon's cause is to ask about the continuous in it and to fill out the gaps in our observations in order thereby to make the…

=== p.229
DA: …ghed til Virkelighed kalder Aristoteles Bevægelse (κίνησις), der altsaa er en Analogi til den moderne Overgang ‖229‖ fra potentiel til aktuel Energi. Først som aktuelt (ἐνεργείᾳ) naar et Væsen sin fulde, udp…
EN: …edisposition; the knower, e.g., does not always have his knowledge present, actual;—but the property can also be there in full actuality or ``energy.'' The transition from possibility to actuality Aristotle calls movement (κίνησις), which is thus an analogy to the modern transition from potential to actual energy. Only as actual (ἐνεργείᾳ) does a being reach its full, pronounced form. Aristotle seeks to describe existence as a series of transitions from possibility (matter) to actuality (form). What hindered Aristo…

=== p.230
DA: …paa Sæden, eller med Haller og Bonnet paa Ægget), saa at Væxten kun var dels en Tiltagen i Størrelse, dels en ‖230‖ Afdækning af Formerne. Ingen Organer blive altsaa virkeligt til under den individuelle Udv…
EN: …rine (Leibniz, Haller, Bonnet) assumed that the organic individual was already present in the germ (whether one, like Leibniz, laid most weight on the seed, or, with Haller and Bonnet, on the egg), so that growth was only partly an increase in size, partly an uncovering of the forms. No organs thus really come to be during the individual development. In opposition to the preformation-doctrine, C. F. Wolff set the so-called epigenesis-theory (1759), in that he demonstrated how an organ can develop out of a predispos…

=== p.231
DA: …Forhold til de tidligere. Og den samme Modsætning fandt Rousseau paa Samfundslivets Omraade i Forholdet mellem ‖231‖ Kulturen med den stedse mere fremtrædende Arbejdsdeling og Naturtilstandens ensartede og u…
EN: …te and heterogeneous in structure and mode of operation than the embryo, so it is also as regards the later stages of the mental life in relation to the earlier. And the same opposition Rousseau found in the domain of social life in the relation between culture, with its ever more prominent division of labor, and the uniform and involuntary form of life of the state of nature.…

=== p.232
DA: …aader i Forestillingen om Udviklingen; ti det er under en Mængde skiftende Former og Skæbner, Slægten efter de ‖232‖ religiøse Forestillinger fremtræder i det store Drama fra Oprindelse til Verdensdom.…
EN: …e idea of a world-history as a development toward a conclusion seems to have arisen, and has from there gained influence on other popular religions—and has thereby in turn become an element in the general human circle of representations. It is in the religious form decidedly the epigenesis-type, not the preformation-type, that prevails in the representation of development; for it is under a mass of changing forms and fates that the race, according to the religious representations, appears in the great drama from origin to world-judgment.…

=== p.233
DA: …em Brydning og Gæring at føre til en Harmoni. Ogsaa Roberto Ardigo tog et psykologisk Udgangspunkt, nemlig det ‖233‖ menneskelige Tankelivs naturlige Udvikling fra det Ubestemte til det Bestemte. — Under for…
EN: …erience and observation had first taught him: processes that begin from different starting-points, hence sporadically, in order then, through breaking and fermentation, to lead to a harmony. Roberto Ardigò too took a psychological starting-point, namely the natural development of human thought-life from the indefinite to the definite.—Under different turns of phrase certain chief features recur in these presentations, chief features that can be formulated in the following way, most nearly in agreement with Spencer'…

=== p.234
DA: …n vendes om. Hvert Stadium er betinget ved det foregaaende og betinger det følgende; fra denne Side set minder ‖234‖ den om den fremskridende Forskelsrække (5); — men da Forholdet mellem første og andet Stad…
EN: …We have, by this schematic presentation, which is a definition of the concept of development, formed a series that cannot be reversed. Each stage is conditioned by the preceding and conditions the following; from this side it recalls the progressive difference-series (5);—but since the relation between the first and second stage is different from that between the second and third, it must be called a regularly varying difference-series (3).…

=== p.235
DA: …gyndelsesstadier for ny Udvikling, saa en rytmisk Række kan danne sig, det er det sidste store Spørgsmaal, som ‖235‖ Kategorilæren ikke kan drøfte. Kun to Betragtninger ere her at gøre gældende.…
EN: …rentiation is abolished;—there sets in either a stable concentration or a state of scatteredness. Whether these states are in turn suited to be initial stages for new development, so that a rhythmic series can form itself, is the last great question that the doctrine of categories cannot discuss. Only two considerations are here to be asserted.…

=== p.236
DA: …ilværelsens hidtil ubenyttede Fonds. Og Tanken selv, den paa Grundlag af Sansning, Anskuen og uvilkaarlig Asso ‖236‖ ciation fremspirede Eftertanke er jo selv „en højere Enhed“, en Udvikling i et tredie Stad…
EN: …poses wholes that can be dissolved, while development does not necessarily presuppose dissolution, since the objects and elements that cooperate could belong to existence's hitherto unused funds. And thought itself, the reflection sprung up on the basis of sensation, intuiting, and involuntary association, is itself ``a higher unity,'' a development in a third stage; it is then natural that it is most occupied with tracing its own analoga.…

=== p.237
DA: …faststaaende Punkter. Det viser sig ved Tid og Sted, ved Rationalitet og Kausalitet; ogsaa ved Anvendelsen af ‖237‖ disse Kategorier forudsættes der et Maal. Men vi blive os da ogsaa bevidste, at vi mere el…
EN: …On the other hand, we cannot think at all without provisionally fixed points. It shows itself with time and place, with rationality and causality; also in the application of these categories a goal is presupposed. But we then also become conscious that we more or less arbitrarily hold fast certain members in the series as beginning- and end-points. Already the simplest formation of judgment must have an initial representation and a…

=== p.238
DA: …g undersøge, hvorvidt det er muligt under Forudsætning af dem at foretage et Tankearbejde, og under hvilke spe ‖238‖ cielle Former dette maa foregaa. Paa Forhaand er det sandsynligt, at Formerne for den vurd…
EN: … we have in the foregoing for simplicity's sake presupposed (6). Now we bring out the fact that there are other interests and values than the intellectual, and investigate how far it is possible, on the presupposition of them, to undertake a thought-work, and under what special forms this must take place. In advance it is probable that the forms of valuing thought must present likeness, at least analogy, with the previously considered forms of thought.…

=== p.239
DA: …Bestaaen og Udvikling, og derved kan da den uvilkaarlige Vurdering faa sin Bekræftelse eller sin Berigtigelse. ‖239‖ Enhver umiddelbar Lyst- eller Ulystfølelse kan fra dette Synspunkt betragtes som en Hypote…
EN: …s hereby indicated a presupposition that alone can make coherent reflection about values possible. For insofar as it holds, an investigation can be made of the conditions for the subsistence and development of the whole in question, and thereby the involuntary valuation can get its confirmation or its correction. Every immediate feeling of pleasure or displeasure can from this point of view be regarded as a hypothesis that is to stand its test. They are immediate qualities like the sense-qualities. Value-qualities …

=== p.240
DA: …? I sidste Tilfælde vil den Forudsætning ligge til Grund, at det er Livet, der giver alt Andet Værdi. Ad denne ‖240‖ Vej kommer man til en Art kosmisk Vurdering, saa at Tilværelsen faar forskelligt Præg for…
EN: …it is when it has developed from nebular mass to sun, or only when its temperature has reached so low a degree that organic life can become possible? In the latter case the presupposition will lie at the basis that it is life that gives everything else value. By this way one comes to a kind of cosmic valuation, so that existence gets a different stamp for us according as it shows itself to favor the development of life or not.…

=== p.241
DA: …giøse Problem af Forholdet mellem de menneskelige Værdier og den uoverskuelige Tilværelse, der ikke samler sig ‖241‖ for os til en Helhed. Vi føle i vore Værdikvaliteter Tilværelsens Puls, som den banker ind…
EN: …nt, perhaps mutually conflicting fundamental values springs, as we shall see in a later section, the problem of valuation. In particular the religious problem springs from the relation between the human values and the vast existence that does not gather itself for us into a whole. We feel in our value-qualities the pulse of existence as it beats within the wholes that we ourselves are or are parts of; but have we thereby the right to infer a heart that beats in the whole of existence? Only by the boldest analogies …

=== p.242
DA: …i vor Lod. De ere Midler, Veje, Forberedelser til umiddelbare Værdier, maa afledes af disse og laane deres Lys ‖242‖ fra disse. Naar saadan Forberedelse er nødvendig, altsaa naar der sker en Overgang fra det…
EN: …values there is a question only when an immediate value cannot without further ado, quite involuntarily, make itself felt or fall to our lot. They are means, ways, preparations for immediate values, must be derived from these and borrow their light from these. When such preparation is necessary, hence when there takes place a transition from the involuntary to the voluntary, the immediate value becomes a purpose. It does not thereby lose its immediacy (in the indicated sense); when the purpose is attained, the valu…

=== p.243
DA: …ler og Veje, der ere nødvendige for Formaalets Opnaaelse. Alle forskellige Arter af Værdier have deres Normer, ‖243‖ betingede ved Forholdet mellem Formaalene og de erfaringsmæssige Betingelser, under hvilke…
EN: …By the relation between immediate and mediate value the concept Norm is conditioned, which expresses a rule for the means and ways that are necessary for the attainment of the purpose. All different kinds of values have their norms, conditioned by the relation between the purposes and the experiential conditions under which they are to be reached. The value of the norm is mediate.…

=== p.245
DA: …vivl ligge til Grund for Filosofiens Problemer, som vi nu gaa over til. Naturligvis er det ogsaa et Problem at ‖245‖ beskrive Tankens Udviklingshistorie og give en Oversigt over dens Former. Men herved have…
EN: …itself doubt about the forms of thought's mutual agreement as well as about their applicability to the objects that make themselves known to us. Such doubts lie at the basis of the problems of philosophy, to which we now pass over. Naturally it is also a problem to describe the development-history of thought and give a survey of its forms. But herein we have already presupposed the validity of the thought-work, as it happens to be constituted. It is this presupposition whose justification is now to be tested.…

=== p.247
DA: …rhistorie, saaledes som Richard Avenarius har givet den, behandles de specielle Forhold og Forskelligheder ved ‖247‖ Problemers Opstaaen. Der opstaar, som han træffende bemærker, en Følelse af Fremmedhed, af…
EN: …all away by extended experience. Problems therefore do not, any more than the categories, continue to be the same at all times. In a natural history of problems, such as Richard Avenarius has given, the special conditions and differences in the arising of problems are treated. There arises, as he aptly remarks, a feeling of strangeness, of lack of security, when a spiritual equilibrium is abolished; every genuine problem is a kind of homesickness. But the home can be sought and found by different ways. One can seek…

=== p.248
DA: …en føler ved at arbejde sig frem til et nyt Standpunkt, hvorfra det enkelte Emne kan ses som Led i en stor Sam ‖248‖ menhæng. Den hellige Ild, som stedse paany sætter Tanken i Bevægelse, trods Alt hvad der k…
EN: …itself. Only thereby is understood the intimate character that the joy of cognition can take on, the amor intellectualis that the inquirer feels in working his way forward to a new standpoint from which the single object can be seen as a member in a great connection. The holy fire that constantly anew sets thought in motion, despite everything that can dampen and hinder it, is understood only when one has this in view. And the personality on its side needs to be purified by bowing to thought's objective connection,…

=== p.249
DA: …Eftertanke formaar at bringe tilveje mellem saa mange Emner som muligt. I Kategorilæren fremtraadte denne Tre ‖249‖ hed i Forskellen mellem de formale, de reale og de ideale Kategorier.…
EN: … in order to keep life up, to the purely intellectual urge whose satisfaction is immediately given with the clear and grounded connection that reflection is able to bring about between as many objects as possible. In the doctrine of categories this triad appeared in the difference between the formal, the real, and the ideal categories.…

=== p.251
DA: …, som Grundlag for Bedømmelse af Handlinger og Bestræbelser (etisk Problem), og som den, hvis Skæbne bestemmer ‖251‖ vor Følelse af Livets og Tilværelsens Værdi (religiøst Problem). Til en fuldstændig Fremst…
EN: …ity becomes of decisive significance. It is the category of whole that lies at the basis of all valuation. We can conceive the whole as image (aesthetic problem), as basis for the judging of actions and endeavors (ethical problem), and as that whose fate determines our feeling of the value of life and of existence (religious problem). For a complete presentation of the philosophical problems it would be required that the aesthetic problem got a peculiar place. But the typical in our relation to the problems will ho…

=== p.253
DA: …at undersøge den Indflydelse, vor Interesse, vort Følelses- og Villiesliv har paa Udformningen af vor Verdens ‖253‖ anskuelse, og dette vil føre til en særlig Behandling af Vurderingsproblemet. Endeligt kan…
EN: …ose the validity of our cognition in general, and that its nature and limits must be investigated. Likewise it will show itself to be necessary to investigate the influence that our interest, our life of feeling and will, has on the shaping of our world-view, and this will lead to a special treatment of the problem of valuation. Finally, one can begin with the urge to distinguish between what one knows and what one does not know, hence with the problem of cognition, and from there one will naturally come over to th…

=== p.254
DA: …pecialpsykologi. Desuden er selve Psykologien, hvad Forudsætninger og Metoder angaar, ligesaa vel som al anden ‖254‖ Videnskab selv Genstand for erkendelsesteoretisk Undersøgelse. Der er en stadig Vexelvirkn…
EN: …eement as possible with them. The subjective, descriptive, and analytic psychology forms an intermediate member between philosophy and special psychology. Besides, psychology itself, as regards presuppositions and methods, is, just like all other science, itself the object of epistemological investigation. There is a constant reciprocal action between epistemology and psychology: the forms that the former sets up must be psychologically possible, and the conception of the nature of the mental life that psychology m…

=== p.255
DA: …gaar i Tankens Historie Vejen til Positivisme. Den gennemløbes ikke en Gang for alle; ofte maa de Enkelte hver ‖255‖ for sig gennemgaa den paany, ligesom der i Fosterudviklingen viser sig en Analogi til Arts…
EN: …ter of such understanding. Here Wallenstein's words hold: Eng ist die Welt, und das Gehirn ist weit. Through Animism and Platonism the way in the history of thought leads to Positivism. It is not traversed once and for all; often individuals must each for themselves go through it anew, just as in embryonic development an analogy to the development of the species shows itself. The psychological possibilities are more comprehensive than the epistemological ones. What the understanding of the objects requires must of …

=== p.256
DA: …Emnerne. Et Subjekt i en Dom kan ikke have Prædikater, der modsige det; og en Slutning kan ikke stride mod For ‖256‖ udsætningerne. Det er atter her en instinktiv Tendens, der ligger til Grund: Trangen til O…
EN: …l categories corresponds the principle of consistency, which requires strict agreement between all the thoughts we form about the objects. A subject in a judgment cannot have predicates that contradict it; and an inference cannot conflict with the premises. It is again here an instinctive tendency that lies at the basis: the urge for agreement with ourselves, for not disowning ourselves when we pass over to new thoughts or objects. Either the new must be brought into agreement with the old, or the old with the new.…

=== p.257
DA: …f alle, og de mest hypotetiske. At de dog opstilles som Principer, berettiges ved, at ethvert Emne fremstiller ‖257‖ sig for os allerede ved sin første Opdukken som en Helhed, og Forstaaelsen af den kan da k…
EN: … for a perfect understanding there is required an attempt to apply these points of view, the most special of all, and the most hypothetical. That they are nonetheless set up as principles is justified by the fact that every object presents itself to us, already at its first emergence, as a whole, and the understanding of it can then only be reached when it is investigated through what stages this whole has come to be. In reality all cognition begins with the question about this, at least as soon as the object is re…

=== p.258
DA: …Men det vilde dog være en Misforstaaelse, hvis man derfor betragtede dem som helt vilkaarlige. Ethvert Arbejds ‖258‖ redskab maa svare til Haanden, der skal bruge det, og som fra først af har frembragt det.…
EN: …Already the sense-qualities are working hypotheses (cf. 12). And still more distinctly it is so with the fundamental propositions of reflection. But it would nonetheless be a misunderstanding if one therefore regarded them as wholly arbitrary. Every working-tool must correspond to the hand that is to use it, and that has from the first produced it. And in a still more intimate relation than the mechanical tools stand to the hand, thought's principles stand to its own essence. One will become clear …

=== p.259
DA: …sivt modtaget. Men Forholdet mellem Aktivitet og Passivitet har uendeligt mange Grader. Et absolut Passivt, et ‖259‖ blot Stof, en ren Fornemmelse kan ikke paavises. Det vilde, som Maimon træffende bemærkede…
EN: …earlier thoughts, test and compare them. Kant committed the fateful error of assuming ``the matter'' (what I have called the objects) as absolutely passively received. But the relation between activity and passivity has infinitely many degrees. An absolutely passive, a mere matter, a pure sensation cannot be demonstrated. It would, as Maimon aptly remarked, be an ``Idea'' in the Kantian sense: we can, by abstraction from the thought-work and from the reciprocal action of the sense-elements, approach something such,…

=== p.260
DA: …og med „andre“ Emner, saa vil der efter det statiske Sandhedsbegreb stadigt være Tvivl mulig om Gyldigheden af ‖260‖ vor Erkendelse, og det Tvivl, der aldrig nogensinde vilde kunne berigtiges. Efter det dyna…
EN: … opposite holds. Since we can never have ``existence itself'' before us as an object, so that we could compare it with our thoughts and with ``other'' objects, there will, according to the static concept of truth, constantly be doubt possible about the validity of our cognition, and a doubt that could never ever be corrected. According to the dynamic concept of truth, on the other hand, we are at once set to work—to find new objects, and to find closer connection between the objects we know. And this work is precis…

=== p.261
DA: …de for at naa den fuldendte Sammenhæng, vi kalde Virkelighed. Det er ikke „Virkeligheden“, der er affaldet fra ‖261‖ „Ideernes“ rene Verden; det er Ideerne, der gennem det Tankearbejde, de fremkalde, føre os…
EN: …absolute time and the absolute space. The critical philosophy, conversely, regards all such concepts as means and forms that come to our aid during our work at reaching the perfect connection we call reality. It is not ``reality'' that has fallen away from the pure world of ``Ideas''; it is the Ideas that, through the thought-work they call forth, lead us forward toward more perfect concepts of reality.…

=== p.262
DA: …Dette er en Betragtning, som er af stor Betydning for at ‖262‖ se menneskelig Videnskab i det rette Lys. Kant fremdrog den i mere almindelig Form end Lei…
EN: …This is a consideration that is of great significance for seeing human science in the right light. Kant brought it out in a more general form than Leibniz (in the utterance cited), in that he emphasized that all our cognition is determined by the human organization. Think of another organization—and another world-p…

=== p.263
DA: …ellem vor Erkendelse og „Tingen i sig selv“, og som i Regelen blot lader „Stoffet“ udspringe af denne, antyder ‖263‖ dog flere Steder, — hvad man fordetmeste ikke agter paa, — at ogsaa vore „Former“ have der…
EN: …Kant, who otherwise so energetically holds fast the opposition between our cognition and ``the thing in itself,'' and who as a rule merely lets ``the matter'' spring from this, nonetheless intimates in several places—what for the most part is not heeded—that our ``forms'' too have their ground in ``Ding an sich.'' If one keeps to these intimations, it shows itself, as I have shown elsewhere, that Kant comes to stand nearer to the phi…

=== p.264
DA: …n havde ogsaa Ret i, at dette ikke ændrer det Mindste i vor Tænknings Fremgangsmaade. Vi maa følge de Veje til ‖264‖ Forstaaelse, der ere os anviste ved vor Aands Natur og vor Stilling i Tilværelsen. For Kop…
EN: …ur cognition—that this is not and can never become a closed system—in this Kant was right, and at bottom far more right than he was conscious of. He was also right that this changes not the least in our thinking's procedure. We must follow the ways to understanding that are pointed out to us by the nature of our mind and our position in existence. For Copernicus, with whom Kant liked to compare himself, it was possible to sketch an image of how the phenomena we regard from the earth's standpoint appear from a wholl…

=== p.265
DA: …Kun da er der nogenlunde Udsigt til at faa alle Emner fremdragne, og alle Former anvendte, som ere nødvendige ‖265‖ til at vinde Forstaaelse, f. Ex. til at anvende Virkelighedskriteriet i et enkelt Tilfælde…
EN: …already stated, it is to the good fortune of all sides of the mental life that thought gets self-governance—that it is not regarded merely as a means, still less as an enemy. Only then is there tolerable prospect of getting all objects brought out, and all forms applied, that are necessary for gaining understanding, e.g. for applying the criterion of reality in an individual case. There will always be more to discover both in the world of objects and in the pure world of thought than any special practical motive ca…

=== p.266
DA: …hvem Gomperz slutter sig, mener, at „Fornuften“ for Aristoteles kun fuldender og afslutter den Induktion, der ‖266‖ skal føre op til Principerne, men han indrømmer, at Aristoteles betoner Modsætningen melle…
EN: …or the apprehension of the principles (ἀρχαί) that lie at the basis of all proof and therefore cannot themselves be proved (Analyt. post. II, 19). Grote, with whom Gomperz agrees, holds that ``reason'' for Aristotle only completes and concludes the induction that is to lead up to the principles, but he concedes that Aristotle emphasizes the opposition between induction and ``reason'' in a way that recalls Plato. Rightly, no doubt, Teichmüller lays the chief weight on the agreement between Plato and Aristotle on thi…

=== p.267
DA: …e de samme. Men det er en uberettiget Antagelse, da Erfaringen aldrig er afsluttet, og nye Emner stadigt kunne ‖267‖ dukke op. Fremdeles forudsatte Kant, at Grundlaget eller Kilden til alle Emner og Former v…
EN: …rience. His ``proof'' for the causal proposition, e.g., presupposes that the objects are given completely, and that their essential properties will continue to be the same. But this is an unjustified assumption, since experience is never concluded, and new objects can constantly emerge. Furthermore Kant presupposed that the basis or source of all objects and forms operates constantly, a presupposition whose necessity likewise cannot be demonstrated (see 110). It is no accident that his nearest successor struck out …

=== p.268
DA: …illes ved en fri Handling. Vor Videnskab hviler ikke paa en „Thatsache“, men paa en „Thathandlung“, nemlig den ‖268‖ tænkende Bevidstheds Beslutning stedse at forblive i Overensstemmelse med sig selv. Ogsaa…
EN: … each other. A similar position on this point was taken by Fichte: the first and unconditioned fundamental proposition of human knowledge—the principle of identity—is set up by a free act. Our science rests not on a ``Thatsache,'' but on a ``Thathandlung,'' namely the thinking consciousness's resolve constantly to remain in agreement with itself. Fichte too concedes that a work of reflection and abstraction (analysis) precedes that act, and that when different fundamental propositions are set up alongside one anoth…

=== p.269
DA: …des vil det være umuligt at finde Principerne for Forstaaelsen af Emnerne, naar vi ikke undersøge disse Emners ‖269‖ faktiske Beskaffenhed. Heller ikke denne Form af Kriticisme kan da frigøre sig fra et Forh…
EN: … acknowledged. But this fundamental law is itself discovered by reflection on our mental nature, as this in fact shows itself to be; and likewise it will be impossible to find the principles for the understanding of the objects if we do not investigate these objects' factual constitution. Nor can this form of criticism, then, free itself from a relation to experience.…

=== p.270
DA: …ge, optræde i Bevidstheden, og hvorledes de bearbejdes. Det gælder for hvert enkelt Individ og hvert Slægtled. ‖270‖ γ. Pragmatismen lægger Hovedvægten paa, at Emnerne bestemme Formernes Anvendelse og Specia…
EN: … in any living being. There would, as we have seen in the discussion of the chaotic difference-series, be needed an infinite analysis if its correctness were to be demonstrated. At every stage of psychic development we know, there are always certain inner conditions present, on which it depends both how the objects that are accessible appear in consciousness and how they are elaborated. This holds for each individual and each generation. γ. Pragmatism lays the chief weight on the fact that the objects determine the forms' application and specialization. Cognition is a constant adaptation; the point is, as Avenarius has expressed it, to think the objects with as little expenditure of force as possible. Here, then, a psychic energy is presupposed, without its being more closely investigated whether it does not by its nature operate in certain definite ways that can in the individual cases …

=== p.271
DA: …virkede uafhængigt af Formerne. I det uvilkaarlige og umiddelbare Liv, som James saa mesterligt har skildret, ‖271‖ er der ingen Forskel mellem Motiv, Form og Emne; de virke sammen paa uadskillelig Maade, l…
EN: …ide us, they can nonetheless accomplish nothing when the capacities and forces are not there. There can never have been a stage of development where the motives operated independently of the forms. In the involuntary and immediate life, which James has so masterfully described, there is no difference between motive, form, and object; they operate together in an inseparable way, as in instinct. If it is an abstraction to isolate the object, as empiricism does, or the form, as criticism does, so it is also an abstrac…

=== p.272
DA: …n opstaa ved Mangel paa Sammenhæng eller ved Selvmodsigelse og Tvivl, skyldes sikkert ikke blot Afmagtsfølelse ‖272‖ eller Harme over Kraftspild, men er tilsidst at føre tilbage til, at selve Bevidsthedens i…
EN: … motive falls away in the last instance. The intellectual feeling of displeasure, or perhaps even feeling of pain, that can arise from lack of connection or from self-contradiction and doubt, is surely due not merely to a feeling of impotence or vexation over waste of force, but is ultimately to be traced back to the fact that the very innermost essence of consciousness is violated.…

=== p.273
DA: …et Forhold mellem de tre Elementer, denne bestemmes ved. Og saaledes er ogsaa Forskellen mellem de tre omtalte ‖273‖ erkendelsesteoretiske Retninger en Forskel i Klangfarven; Mere bør den i hvert Tilfælde ik…
EN: … vanishing. The difference between what one calls theoretical and practical thinking is only a difference in the timbre, respectively in the relation between the three elements by which this is determined. And thus too the difference between the three epistemological directions discussed is a difference in the timbre; more than that it should in any case not be.…

=== p.275
DA: …ed, der lettest kunne omformes saaledes, at Identitetsprincipet kan gælde i de Rækker, de danne, saa at Substi ‖275‖ tution kan blive mulig. Og i Analogi med disse Rækker ordnes de andre Kvalitetsrækker, saa…
EN: …the expedient of putting, by way of analogy, quantitative differences in place of qualitative ones. It is the qualities time, number, degree, and place that can most easily be reshaped in such a way that the principle of identity can hold in the series they form, so that substitution can become possible. And in analogy with these series the other quality-series are ordered, so that they—as far as the analogy holds—can come under the principle of identity. These series can then be constructed by constant addition of…

=== p.276
DA: …vente paa; hine kan den foregribe, blot ved efter visse Regler at gentage samme Tankeakter. Kant har klart ud ‖276‖ trykt dette (i det mærkelige Brev til Hertz af 21. Febr. 1772): „Kun derved blive Tingene…
EN: …look to experience. Thought is therefore more self-active in the case of quantitative differences than when it stands before qualities. These it must wait for; those it can anticipate, merely by repeating, according to certain rules, the same acts of thought. Kant has clearly expressed this (in the remarkable letter to Herz of 21 Feb. 1772): ``Only thereby do things become magnitudes for us, can they be represented as magnitudes, that we can produce the representation of them by repeating one thing a number of time…

=== p.277
DA: …ntiteter og Kvaliteter til Identitet og saa i Bevægelsen og de Elementer, der bevægede sig, en Verden, der var ‖277‖ den sande materielle Virkelighed. Denne Verden var ifølge Descartes og Newton umiddelbart…
EN: …ical conception of nature. The principles according to which natural science worked were conceived as the expression of absolute realities. One made the analogy between quantities and qualities into identity and saw in movement and the elements that moved a world that was the true material reality. This world was, according to Descartes and Newton, immediately created by God, while materialistic authors like Holbach held that it had subsisted from eternity as the only true reality. The physicists were on this point…

=== p.278
DA: …gger en Kreds af Symboler til Grund, der kan anvendes med fuld Konsekvens, — at den har fundet en Analogi, ved ‖278‖ hvis Hjælp der kan drages Slutninger, som bekræftes ved nye Erfaringer, der igen kunne udt…
EN: …of the mechanical conception is very well compatible with only dynamic and symbolic truth being ascribed to this conception. Its significance consists in its laying at the basis a circle of symbols that can be applied with full consistency—in its having found an analogy by whose help inferences can be drawn that are confirmed by new experiences, which can again be expressed by help of the same symbols. But the possibility is never excluded that another circle of symbols or models could just as well, if not better, …

=== p.279
DA: …han henviste til, at der vel ikke var Identitet, men dog kunde være Analogi mellem Begivenhedernes Række i Ti ‖279‖ den og Rækken af Grunde og Følger (Forudsætninger og Slutsætninger) i den logiske og matem…
EN: … possible to order the events in such series that from the earlier members one can infer the following ones?—This was the way Kant went, in that he pointed out that there was indeed no identity, but there could yet be analogy, between the series of events in time and the series of grounds and consequents (premises and conclusions) in logical and mathematical thinking. The real categories could thus be conceived in analogy with the formal ones. And—Kant adds—only because this analogy holds can we distinguish between…

=== p.280
DA: …igt at føre os frem til nye Opgaver. Og hvor vi ikke kunne løse disse Opgaver, have vi kun Ret til at sige, at ‖280‖ vi ikke have fundet Aarsagen, ikke, at der ingen er. Den Mulighed var ikke udelukket, at v…
EN: … it is called a law, this can strictly speaking hold only for the cases in which it has shown itself to be sufficient guidance for us. Its most important significance is constantly to lead us on to new tasks. And where we cannot solve these tasks, we have only the right to say that we have not found the cause, not that there is none. The possibility was not excluded that we could indeed apply the criterion of reality to establish the truth of a series of events each for itself, but could not find any connection amo…

=== p.281
DA: …nisation. Vi faa ved dette Synspunkt en stadig Opfordring til at undersøge Emnerne saa nøje som muligt, for at ‖281‖ Analogien kan gennemføres saa meget som muligt. I det logiske Forhold mellem Grund og Følg…
EN: …are here connected with science's highest investigations under one and the same type of thought, which hangs closely together with the inner organization of our thought. We get through this point of view a constant summons to investigate the objects as closely as possible, so that the analogy can be carried through as far as possible. In the logical relation between ground and consequent, differences of time and of quality play no role, and for the analogy to be carried through one must therefore reduce such differ…

=== p.282
DA: …Ret overfor Spekulationens Iver for at finde „Enheden i Alt“. William James fortsætter i den nyeste Tid deres ‖282‖ Værk. Men deri toge dog Schelling og Hegel ikke Fejl, at det er Enhed vi søge. Deres Fejl…
EN: …It was Comte's and Mill's mission in the philosophy of the 19th century to maintain the differences of the objects and their right over against speculation's zeal to find ``the unity in all.'' William James continues their work in the most recent time. But in this, nevertheless, Schelling and Hegel were not mistaken, that it is unity we seek. Their error was that they too rashly believed themselves to have found it, and next, that they proclaimed the possibility of deriving the multiplicity of objec…

=== p.283
DA: …Fra spekulativ Side er det gjort gældende, at saalænge ‖283‖ Tidsforholdet er bestemmende for vor Opfattelse af Tilværelsen, er vor Opfattelse ufuldkom…
EN: …From the speculative side it has been urged that so long as the time-relation is determining for our conception of existence, our conception is imperfect, and an absolute cognition is not reached. And our cognition works itself—one further maintains—more and more away from the time-relation: the more clearly we und…

=== p.284
DA: …angaar, saa udtrykkes Emnernes Afhængighedsforhold bedre ved Hjælp af det matematiske Funktionsbegreb end ved ‖284‖ de ubestemte Udtryk „Aarsag og Virkning“. Tilmed er der det Uheldige ved enhver Anvendelse…
EN: …s to give an exact, methodical description of all relations and transitions in experience. As now especially regards the causal relation, the objects' relation of dependence is expressed better by help of the mathematical concept of function than by the indefinite expressions ``cause and effect.'' Moreover there is this unfortunate feature in every application of the concepts cause and effect, that two objects are arbitrarily taken out of the whole continuous connection in which they occur, and set in opposition to…

=== p.286
DA: …). Naar A og B ere ækvivalente, er det i en vis Forstand ligegyldigt, om jeg gaar over fra B til A eller fra A ‖286‖ til B. Og dog er det i hvert enkelt virkeligt Tilfælde enten A, der gaar over til B, eller…
EN: …lence. The relation of equivalence excludes neither difference of time nor difference of quality, just as little as the relation of identity needs to do so (see 69 and 73). When A and B are equivalent, it is in a certain sense indifferent whether I pass over from B to A or from A to B. And yet in each single actual case it is either A that passes over to B, or B that passes over to A,—and this difference can be a difference between life and death. In the Carnot theorem (the entropy theorem) this comes clearly to th…

=== p.287
DA: …lle, Iagttagelsen mindre, ikke omvendt. I alt dette udtaler der sig helt igennem kun en ejendommelig, dybt lig ‖287‖ gende Sammenhæng i Tingene. Men allerede nu at ville fordre fuldkommen Klarhed her, er det…
EN: … left to themselves. If we consider two bodies left to themselves, touching each other, of different temperature, memory will offer greater differences of temperature, observation smaller, not the reverse. In all this there expresses itself throughout only a peculiar, deep-lying connection in things. But to want to demand complete clarity here already now is the same as, in the manner of speculative philosophy, to want to anticipate all future special research's results, thus to demand a completed natural science.'…

=== p.288
DA: …individuellere det Emne er, der skal forklares, og det vil sige: jo mere det udgør en Helhed og gennemløber en ‖288‖ Udvikling. Der er her en hel Skala med stigende Komplikationer fra den simple Stedbevægels…
EN: …The analogy on which the causal principle is built becomes the more difficult to carry through, the more concrete and individual the object is that is to be explained, and that is to say: the more it constitutes a whole and runs through a development. There is here a whole scale with rising complications from simple locomotion through the physical and chemical processes to the organic, psychical, and social phenomena. The further we come forward in this series, the more the causal princi…

=== p.289
DA: …pecielle Grundsætninger af metodisk Art, som hænge sammen med Kategorierne Helhed og Udvikling, skønt de i det ‖289‖ Enkelte ville vise sig i Grunden at være Anvendelser af Aarsagsprincipet.…
EN: …ddles, still thought has after all no other means than the causal principle with which to illuminate them. Yet there are some special fundamental principles of a methodical kind, which hang together with the categories whole and development, though they will in the particular show themselves at bottom to be applications of the causal principle.…

=== p.290
DA: …ogien lader „Samfundet“ optræde som en Art Substans forskellig fra og svævende over de enkelte Individer. Naar ‖290‖ man stiller Helheden i Modsætning til Elementerne (f. Ex. Organismen i Modsætning til dens…
EN: …' gives only an imagined explanation, just as when one explains special mental utterances by the intervention of ``the soul,'' or in sociology lets ``society'' appear as a kind of substance different from and hovering over the single individuals. When one sets the whole in opposition to the elements (e.g. the organism in opposition to its parts, the soul in opposition to its thoughts, feelings, or strivings, society in opposition to the single individuals), this can only mean that beyond the activity we in the sing…

=== p.291
DA: …er ingen er. Som jeg tror tilstrækkeligt at have paavist, kan der ikke føres noget Bevis for Aarsagssætningens ‖291‖ absolute Gyldighed. Den er en Arbejdshypotese — i den Betydning, i hvilken jeg ovenfor (11…
EN: … this last word itself must be said by virtue of the causal principle. It sounds perhaps as though no more causes can be found, but can never sound as though there are none. As I believe I have sufficiently shown, no proof can be given for the causal principle's absolute validity. It is a working hypothesis—in the sense in which I above (113; 117) have taken this word. Should there now be objects in the face of which we must give up applying this working hypothesis?…

=== p.292
DA: …inger; den strækker sig gennem alle Motiver og Handlinger som det indre sammenholdende Baand. Den Handlende er ‖292‖ selv i sine Motiver og i sine Handlinger, naar han virkeligt er en Personlighed. Der kan h…
EN: …sessor and property, between receiving and giving. The will works throughout our whole life from the simplest utterances of instinct and drive to the highest resolutions; it stretches through all motives and actions as the inner binding band. The agent is himself in his motives and in his actions, when he really is a personality. There can here be distinguished between a central element (which I usually call the real self) and a peripheral, with all possible intermediate degrees; but out of the circle we never come…

=== p.293
DA: …inere „Friheden“ ved at gøre Villiesakten afhængig af Personligheden. Man kan da ifølge Bergson kun hævde „Fri ‖293‖ heden“, naar man ikke siger, hvad den er! Og dog har han selv defineret Friheden, naar han…
EN: …indeterminism and determinism; but he warns against defining what ``freedom'' is, since this will always lead back to determinism, because one can only define ``freedom'' by making the act of will dependent on the personality. One can then, according to Bergson, only maintain ``freedom'' when one does not say what it is! And yet he has himself defined freedom, when he finds the continuity between past and future to be its essential mark. He is then himself a determinist, not merely because he defines ``freedom,'' b…

=== p.294
DA: …Spild og Strid, at selvom vi bevare en Erindring om denne, kunne vi dog ikke let tænke os en indre Sammenhæng ‖294‖ mellem de to Tilstande. Achilleus' pludselige og afgørende Selvbeherskelse overfor Agamemn…
EN: … The new state, in which our whole mind is concentrated in the thought of the action, stands in such opposition to the deliberation's waste and strife that even though we retain a memory of this, we can nevertheless not easily imagine an inner connection between the two states. Achilles' sudden and decisive self-mastery in the face of Agamemnon (in the Iliad's first canto) Homer could only explain to himself by Athena's coming down from Olympus and—visible only to the wrathful hero—pulling him by his locks and hold…

=== p.296
DA: …ste det Spørgsmaal, hvorvidt de blot ere at skrive paa det erkendende Subjekts Vegne eller besidde en objektiv ‖296‖ Karakter. Forholdet mellem Subjekt og Objekt falder ikke uden videre sammen med Forholdet…
EN: …nd causality we had to do with the relation between object and form. We now direct our reflection toward both of them together, in that we raise the question how far they are merely to be set to the account of the cognizing subject or possess an objective character. The relation between subject and object does not without more ado coincide with the relation between form and object.…

=== p.297
DA: …atur og Virkemaade faa Indflydelse paa Erkendelsens Resultater, des mindre kunne vi hævde disse Resultater som ‖297‖ rene Objekter. — Med Kriticismen er her Pragmatismen enig, kun at den betragter Formerne s…
EN: …k unceasingly and involuntarily at reshaping the objects in such a way that there can appear as great a continuity between them as possible. But the more our own mind's nature and mode of working gain influence on cognition's results, the less can we maintain these results as pure objects.—With criticism pragmatism here agrees, only that it regards the forms as mere means, not as expressions of the subject's nature.…

=== p.299
DA: …stadige Vexelvirkning af indre og ydre Betingelser komme vi ikke. Der er her Mulighed for en uendelig Række: [ ‖299‖ S_1 < O_1 < S_2 < O_2 , ]…
EN: …ars as $S_1$. That which $O_1$ works upon we can designate as $S_o$, since it in each case forms an analogy to $S_1$. (Cf. 9.) Beyond the constant reciprocal action of inner and outer conditions we do not come. There is here possibility of an infinite series: [ S_1 < O_1 < S_2 < O_2 , ]…

=== p.300
DA: …stedse kunne øves paany, skønt den naturligvis vil faa stedse ringere Indhold, jo mere den fjerner sig fra den ‖300‖ oprindelige konkrete og emnerige Tilstand. Det er en sig selv frembringende Række, stedse…
EN: …ing or sensing. The thought $S_1$ can become object for the thought $S_2$, this for $S_3$, and so forth. The act of self-consciousness will always be able to be exercised anew, though it will of course get ever slighter content, the more it removes itself from the original concrete and object-rich state. It is a self-producing series, always continued according to the same law.…

=== p.301
DA: …126. Af alt dette følger, at Erkendelsens Fremskriden ‖301‖ snart bestaar i at gøre det Objektive subjektivt, d. v. s. udskille det i Erkendelsens Gen…
EN: …126. From all this it follows that cognition's advance consists now in making the objective subjective, that is, sorting out in cognition's objects what is conditioned by the character of the cognizing subject, now in making the subjective objective, that is, making the very nature of the cognizing subject into an…

=== p.302
DA: …e, der kræves til at udvikle strengt exakte Iagttagelser og Tankerækker, men til Gengæld kan det da være andre ‖302‖ Sider af Tilværelsen, der blive tilgængelige: Shakespeare forstod, hvorledes Mennesker ere…
EN: …pacities are present that the definite objects presuppose. The subject can be richly equipped in its life of feeling and fantasy; it will then perhaps not be able to perform the labor required to develop strictly exact observations and trains of thought, but in return it can then be other sides of existence that become accessible: Shakespeare understood how human beings are disposed under fate's heavy course and in severe conflicts, and in great religious personalities there has been a feeling of life's oppositions…

=== p.305
DA: …ans er særligt udviklet. Hvad Erindrings- og Forestillingslivet angaar, viser det sig i Forskellen mellem visu ‖305‖ elle, auditive og motoriske Individer. Hos Nogle kunne indenfor Erkendelseslivet Formerne,…
EN: …ards sensation, e.g. in the difference between the color-blind and those who apprehend all colors, or between those in whom one or another sense is especially developed. As regards the life of memory and representation, it shows itself in the difference between visual, auditory, and motor individuals. In some the forms, in others the objects, in others again the values, can within the life of cognition play the greatest role. And the more the life of thought takes on a personal character, the more types will appear…

=== p.307
DA: …mod det Intuitive. Det er en Anskuen, som adskiller sig fra den, der dannede Forudsætning for Eftertanken, der ‖307‖ ved, at den har gennemgaaet Eftertankens Skærsild. Det er altsaa en afsluttende Syntese, d…
EN: …sh to ascend to an intuiting, in which all the found and compared particulars find their place. From the discursive we long up toward the intuitive. It is an intuiting that differs from the one that formed the presupposition for reflection by the fact that it has gone through reflection's purgatory. It is thus a concluding synthesis that is sought. If one will use the old word metaphysics of an attempt in this direction, one can say that in all there is a metaphysical need. Involuntarily the different objects that …

=== p.308
DA: …Allerede paa Grund af den uvilkaarlige Tendens til meta ‖308‖ fysiske Forestillinger vil det være af Betydning at opstille et særligt Problem her. Som e…
EN: …Already on account of the involuntary tendency to metaphysical representations it will be of significance to set up a special problem here. As a French philosopher has said: Hélas, il est plus difficile qu'on ne l'imagine de ne point faire de métaphysique; la pire de toutes est celle qui s'ignore. Philosophy must tes…

=== p.309
DA: …ogi og Teologi. Her vil jeg bruge Ordet Kosmologi i den mest omfattende Betydning: Verdensanskuelse, der ogsaa ‖309‖ etymologisk kan forsvares, da Kosmos betyder Verden og Logos Tanke eller Lære.…
EN: … Chr. Wolff, comprehended, besides ontology (which corresponds to the doctrine of categories and epistemology), the three parts: cosmology, psychology, and theology. Here I will use the word cosmology in the most comprehensive sense: world-view, which can also etymologically be defended, since Kosmos means world and Logos thought or doctrine.…

=== p.310
DA: …maaske er der her en indre Sammenhæng mellem de to Problemer. Naar Erkendelsen stedse ender i ny Søgen og ikke ‖310‖ kan afsluttes, og naar den selv er en Del af Tilværelsen, saa ligger allerede deri, at Til…
EN: …the same, whether we speak of ``the world'' or of ``God.'' The irrational announces itself here just as in the problem of cognition. And perhaps there is here an inner connection between the two problems. When cognition constantly ends in new seeking and cannot be concluded, and when it is itself a part of existence, then already therein lies that existence cannot be a concluded whole. And on the other side, what is irrational for cognition, which indeed especially hangs together with the time-relation, could stem …

=== p.311
DA: …ige kosmologiske Systemer ere ligesaa mange Forsøg paa at lodde Tilværelsens Dyb ved at prøve, hvorvidt det er ‖311‖ muligt at forstaa den ud fra en enkelt Side i vor Erfaring. Det er en Række af Tankeexperi…
EN: …ing an object at the ground for the understanding of all the others, and by this way the need for formal unity can then be sought satisfied. The different cosmological systems are just so many attempts to sound existence's depth by testing how far it is possible to understand it from a single side in our experience. It is a series of thought-experiments by which our most important thoughts' reach has been tested.…

=== p.312
DA: …tillige er Lov, saa at man blot behøver at udtale det for at have Forklaringen af det. Det maa desuden ikke be ‖312‖ tragtes som sammensat; det er en „Grænse for vor Skuen“; det vækker „den store Undren“, me…
EN: …nderstood by ``primal phenomenon'' not merely an object that could serve to illuminate other objects for us. It means for him a fact that is at the same time law, so that one merely needs to utter it in order to have the explanation of it. It must moreover not be regarded as composite; it is a ``limit for our beholding''; it awakens ``the great wonder,'' but designates at the same time our cognition's limit. It is known how fateful a role this concept played in Goethe's doctrine of colors (where it found its expres…

=== p.313
DA: …erdensanskuelse blive af væsentlig Betydning, hvad enten selve dette gøres til Urfænomen eller ikke. Selvom vi ‖313‖ vilde betragte alle Principer og Love som blotte Arbejdshypoteser, saa tjener det dog til…
EN: …act that existence, as we know it, is to a great extent accessible to understanding, shows itself subject to general laws, must in every world-view become of essential significance, whether this very fact is made into primal phenomenon or not. Even if we would regard all principles and laws as mere working hypotheses, it nevertheless serves to characterize existence that one, as regards understanding of it and dominion over it, can only get at it along certain definite ways. Every, even the most special branch of n…

=== p.314
DA: …Elasticitet i Sind og Tanke til at svinge mellem den dybe Forvisning, en stor Ide kan fremkalde, og den faste ‖314‖ Overbevisning om, at fortsat Drøftelse stadigt er nødvendig. Fantasien med dens Evne til a…
EN: … over existence, and of applying them with full consciousness of their problematic character. There belongs great psychical energy to working on these conditions, great elasticity in mind and thought to swing between the deep conviction a great idea can call forth, and the firm conviction that continued discussion is constantly necessary. Fantasy, with its capacity to form whole-pictures, has its great significance in science as in art. But in science such whole-pictures—whether they are to hold only for single obj…

=== p.315
DA: …sofisk System er et Kunstværk, et Drama, i hvilket de enkelte Repliker og Scener slutte sig sammen, snart mere ‖315‖ med logisk, snart mere med æstetisk Harmoni. Platon's, Spinoza's og Schopenhauer's Systeme…
EN: …single object determines the timbre. The point of view (the primal phenomenon) and its carrying-through here unavoidably get a personal stamp. A great philosophical system is a work of art, a drama, in which the single lines and scenes join together, now more with logical, now more with aesthetic harmony. Plato's, Spinoza's, and Schopenhauer's systems especially offer this stamp.…

=== p.316
DA: …lbar Erfaring er forbundet og paa en Gang optræder som Enhed og Mangfoldighed, det gøres nu til en Mosaik uden ‖316‖ virkelig indre Enhed. Skal en Metafysik være mulig, maa vi ved en Villiesanstrængelse vend…
EN: …cially language, which predominantly applies space-pictures and therefore really can only express purely external relations. What in immediate experience is connected and at once appears as unity and multiplicity, is now made into a mosaic without real inner unity. If a metaphysics is to be possible, we must by an exertion of will return from analysis to intuition, look at the objects, not with ``the understanding's'' eyes (les yeux de la seule intelligence), which only discover the outer, but with ``the spirit'' (…

=== p.317
DA: …fysiken) ifølge Bergson kun bliver til ved, at vi gaa i modsat Retning af Tankens vante Bevægelse: Philosopher ‖317‖ consiste à invertir la direction habituelle de la vie de la pensée — remonter la pente nat…
EN: …lly commands, we get no clear answer. This is understandable, since the understanding has laid claim to language, and since philosophy (metaphysics) according to Bergson only comes to be by our going in the opposite direction of thought's accustomed movement: Philosopher consiste à invertir la direction habituelle de la vie de la pensée — remonter la pente naturelle de l'intelligence!…

=== p.318
DA: …d at søge Svaret paa dette Spørgsmaal i Bergsons Fremstilling finder jeg Hypotesen om al Metafysik som grundet ‖318‖ paa Analogi bekræftet. I hans Introduction à la Métaphysique (p. 25 f.) hedder det nemlig:…
EN: …In seeking the answer to this question in Bergson's presentation I find the hypothesis of all metaphysics as grounded on analogy confirmed. In his Introduction à la Métaphysique (p. 25 f.) it runs, namely: La conscience que nous avons de notre propre personne, dans son continuel écoulement, nous introduit à l'intérieur d'une réalité sur le modèle de laquelle vous devons vous…

=== p.319
DA: …133. For Filosofen ligger de ‖319‖ t nær at tage Udgangspunktet for sin Verdensanskuelse i selve den Kendsgerning, at det er…
EN: …133. For the philosopher it lies near to take the point of departure for his world-view in the very fact that it is possible to orient oneself in existence by cognition's help. The primal phenomenon then becomes intelligibility itself, as it is from thought's side anticipated in the cate…

=== p.320
DA: …ed Konsekvens. Vildfarelsen beror paa, at et Begrænset, en Del, gøres til et Hele; men naar man saa blot konse ‖320‖ kvent gennemtænker dette Begrænsede, vil man komme til at se, hvor dets Grænse ligger, lig…
EN: … service than the straight ways. The criterion of reality teaches that it is not merely a matter of gathering as many objects as possible, but also of thinking them through with consistency. Error rests on a limited thing, a part, being made into a whole; but when one then merely consistently thinks through this limited thing, one will come to see where its limit lies, just as one will soonest find one's way out of a forest when one follows one definite direction instead of constantly changing direction. Intellecti…

=== p.321
DA: …given Tid besvares af Erfaringsvidenskaben. For Filosofen er det ikke denne endeløse Række, der er Hovedsagen, ‖321‖ saa megen Interesse den end i sig selv kan frembyde; det Væsentlige er for ham den Tanke,…
EN: …nd with an unanswered question. How far we can actually follow the causal series back is a question that at each given time is answered by empirical science. For the philosopher it is not this endless series that is the main thing, however much interest it may in itself offer; the essential thing is for him the thought according to which there must constantly be sought, and can be found, new members in the causal series. He finds here a world-order expressed, which encloses all that exists in the most intimate way,…

=== p.322
DA: …t, hvad enten den selv lægger Vægt derpaa eller ikke. Monismen er derfor uovervindelig, selvom den stadigt maa ‖322‖ brydes med den fremskridende og mangfoldige Erfaring og derfor maa betegnes som kritisk Mo…
EN: …Even if conclusion is not possible, the world-view can nevertheless bear unity's stamp, and every world-view must, whether it itself lays weight on it or not. Monism is therefore invincible, even though it constantly must struggle with the advancing and manifold experience and therefore must be designated as critical monism. It is by virtue of synthesis's own law that every unity-view we can form for ourselves of existence points out beyond itself: every object is set in r…

=== p.323
DA: …kan høre op at være søgende. Hegels eget System er faldet for den Dialektik, han selv stedse krævede som Sand ‖323‖ hedens Medium, og som ytrer sig i, at ethvert Tankeindhold stilles overfor et andet og der…
EN: …rence between subject, method, and object; but in the true cognition these differences fall away. The question is precisely whether thought can ever cease to be seeking. Hegel's own system has fallen to the dialectic he himself constantly demanded as truth's medium, and which utters itself in that every thought-content is set over against another and thereby leads out beyond itself. Thus it has gone with Hegel's system in the face of new objects and new points of view (also in the face of certain old objects and po…

=== p.324
DA: …d god Grund til at gøre pluralistiske Synspunkter gældende. Der er endnu stedse for megen spekulativ Metafysik ‖324‖ i Luften, hvad enten den nu optræder i filosofisk eller i teologisk Form. Det er af Betydn…
EN: …hat difference, opposition, and change is the condition for all sensation and thought. (Cf. 11; 21.) There is surely also, under philosophy's present condition, good ground to make pluralistic points of view felt. There is still constantly too much speculative metaphysics in the air, whether it now appears in philosophical or in theological form. It is of significance that we not forget what positivism and criticism have taught us. The old English school had the mission of holding philosophers' attention fixed on e…

=== p.326
DA: …Tanken ikke kan undvære. For James hang fra først af „den radikale Pluralisme“ sammen med „den rene Erfarings ‖326‖ Filosofi“, medens han senere har udtalt, at Pragmatismen, der skal være et radikalt Udtryk…
EN: …aintenance of pluralism—really only concerned to hold fast the constant relation of unity and multiplicity (la correlation de l'un et du plusieurs), which thought cannot do without. For James ``the radical pluralism'' hung together from the first with ``the philosophy of pure experience,'' while he later has declared that pragmatism, which is to be a radical expression of the philosophy of experience, must in equal degree reject the absolute monism and the absolute pluralism, and he now designates his standpoint as…

=== p.327
DA: …s egentlige Grundtanke fremtræder sikkert paa dette Punkt. Naar hans System ikke formaar at bringe dette Punkt ‖327‖ i fuld og konsekvent Sammenhæng med andre Punkter, ligger Hovedgrunden i, at han mente at…
EN: …whole: in the single individual existence's innermost direction and striving there made itself known precisely existence's fundamental principle. Spinoza's real fundamental thought surely appears at this point. When his system does not manage to bring this point into full and consistent connection with other points, the main ground lies in the fact that he believed he could get all the irrational out of the way and with right found its last source in the time-relation. If the last principle in our world-view is tim…

=== p.328
DA: …kendende Subjekter ere stedte i Udvikling, men tilsidst deri, at selve Tilværelsen ikke er færdig, men stedt i ‖328‖ Vorden og Udvikling, ligesom Erkendelsen er det. Afsluttet Erkendelse vilde kun være mulig…
EN: …But the possibility is not excluded that the ground why full understanding is not possible is to be sought not merely in the fact that the cognizing subjects are placed in development, but finally in the fact that existence itself is not finished, but placed in becoming and development, just as cognition is. Concluded cognition would only be possible if existence were concluded. The time-form, the source of all irrationality, might be not merely one of our categories, but an existence-form that we…

=== p.330
DA: …ld er nu ogsaa det, der først og fremmest er Brug for under den fortsatte Forsken, saa at det egner sig til at ‖330‖ udtrykke Forholdet mellem de Emner, Psykologien beskæftiger sig med, og dem, Fysiologien b…
EN: …as doubtful whether there also subsists a time-relation between them, with conversions from physical energy to psychical, and conversely. But that relation of function is now also what first and foremost is of use in continued research, so that it is suited to express the relation between the objects psychology occupies itself with, and those physiology occupies itself with.…

=== p.331
DA: …v efterat Forskellen mellem det Aandelige og det Materielle er bleven anerkendt, kan der være Grunde, som tale ‖331‖ til Gunst for at betragte det Materielle som Urfænomenet og altsaa lade det indtage den fu…
EN: …Even after the difference between the spiritual and the material has been acknowledged, there can be grounds that speak in favor of regarding the material as the primal phenomenon and thus letting it occupy the fundamental place in the world-view.—The spiritual shows itself indeed, when we strictly hold to experience, only to appear in some earthly organisms, while the mat…

=== p.332
DA: …Tilhold. Selve Begrebet Materie, saaledes som Naturvidenskaben bestemmer det i stedse mere „æteriske“ Former, ‖332‖ er et Tankeprodukt, bygget paa Iagttagelser og Forsøg. Og selvom man saa igen vilde paasta…
EN: …al thought, that we know matter only through spiritual activity, through the energy that utters itself in sensation and thinking, and which therefore naturally becomes our last refuge. The very concept matter, as natural science determines it in ever more ``ethereal'' forms, is a thought-product, built on observations and experiments. And even if one then again would assert that the thought that has produced this concept is itself again a product of matter, then there follows from idealism's side as rejoinder that …

=== p.333
DA: …ger man Vægten paa, at Tanken synes at optræde paa et meget sent Trin i Verdensudviklingen, saa kunde jo dette ‖333‖ antages at tyde paa, at de væsentligste Kvaliteter behøve længst Tid for ret at udfolde si…
EN: …was of far greater significance for the deepest understanding of existence than all the much that moves in space. And if one lays the weight on the fact that thought seems to appear at a very late step in the world-development, then this could indeed be assumed to indicate that the most essential qualities need the longest time to unfold themselves properly.…

=== p.334
DA: …dlægger, var sig derimod fuldt bevidst, at han byggede paa Analogi. Det var ved dennes Hjælp, at han opfattede ‖334‖ Tilværelsen som et Kontinuum af Monader, idet disse repræsentere uendeligt mange forskelli…
EN: …Leibniz, the metaphysical idealism's real founder, was on the other hand fully conscious that he built on analogy. It was by this's help that he conceived existence as a continuum of monads, in that these represent infinitely many different degrees of the same thing that in the human being appears as mental life. The fragmentary character of the world of spirit is only apparent. Nature makes no leaps. Unconsciousness a…

=== p.335
DA: …ikatsbestemmelser, Slutningsforestillinger; men om denne Række nogensinde er fuldstændig, saa at Alt, hvad der ‖335‖ „ligger i“ Grundlaget, i den ubestemte Udgangsforestilling, kommer til at optræde som Led…
EN: … division. On this point too existence could be inexhaustible. All our knowledge develops through a series of predicate-determinations, conclusion-representations; but whether this series is ever complete, so that all that ``lies in'' the ground, in the indeterminate point-of-departure representation, comes to appear as member in the series (cf. 35), cannot be decided, and still less whether all sides of existence make themselves known in the object-ground on which our knowledge thus builds. An Either—Or would only…

=== p.336
DA: …undringen“, — „og,“ føjer han til, „naar Urfænomenet sætter ham i Forundring, saa være han tilfreds; et Højere ‖336‖ kan det ikke yde ham, og videre skal han ikke søge bagved det; her er Grænsen.“ Goethes Tr…
EN: …According to Goethe ``the highest a human being can reach is wonder,''—``and,'' he adds, ``when the primal phenomenon sets him in wonder, let him be content; a higher it cannot yield him, and further he shall not seek behind it; here is the limit.'' Goethe's need for poetic beholding here comes to light. But even though we find no primal phenomenon,—and precisely because we find none,—there is room for the great wonder. Out beyo…

=== p.337
DA: …Tilværelsen vilde frembyde stor Simpelhed, hvis der kun ‖337‖ var to Grundformer, under hvilke den traadte frem. Men det, der staar for os som simpelt o…
EN: …Existence would offer great simplicity if there were only two fundamental forms under which it stepped forth. But what stands for us as simple and easily surveyable can very well be due to a very intricate connection. In our simplest sense-sensations we have examples of this, when we compare them with the physical …

=== p.338
DA: …r af Forskellen mellem det Aandelige og det Materielle; men han havde da maattet udtrykke sig noget mindre dog ‖338‖ matisk. Heller ikke kunne vi følge ham i den Antagelse, at alle de forskellige Attributer…
EN: …n only thereby find expression. It is Spinoza's belief that here comes to light. He could simply have supported himself on the purely empirical character of the difference between the spiritual and the material; but he would then have had to express himself somewhat less dogmatically. Neither can we follow him in the assumption that all the different attributes are logically coordinate or ``parallel.'' The possibility cannot be rejected that one or more of the attributes inaccessible to us contain the ground for th…

=== p.339
DA: …lindiske Filosofi i „Upanishad“ gennem Eleater og Platonikere til Spinoza og Hegel. Og denne Tendens ytrer sig ‖339‖ ikke blot i den rene Spekulation. Det uvilkaarlige Hang til at dvæle i Anskuen istedetfor…
EN: … thought's history again and again a striving makes itself felt to eliminate the concept of time. Such a striving can be traced from the ancient Indian philosophy in the ``Upanishad'' through Eleatics and Platonists to Spinoza and Hegel. And this tendency utters itself not merely in pure speculation. The involuntary inclination to dwell in beholding instead of going over to analysis and judgment-formation already leads to preferring being to becoming, so that it is no wonder when the unchangeable is often in and fo…

=== p.340
DA: …Og efter Udvikling følger Opløsning. Spørgsmaalet bliver da, om der trods Ligegyldigheden og Sammenstødene kan ‖340‖ spores en fremskridende Udviklingsgang indenfor Tilværelsen, saavidt vi kunne betragte den…
EN: …ns between them, in such a way that the conflict or convergence does not lead to whole-formation or in any case hampers and threatens this. And after development follows dissolution. The question then becomes whether, in spite of the indifference and the collisions, an advancing course of development can be traced within existence, so far as we can regard this as a whole.…

=== p.341
DA: …e Slutninger, i hvilke der stedse maa optages nye Præmisser: [ l A = B A , B = C A = C A = C , C = D A = D A = ‖341‖ ]…
EN: …it up to higher, more definitely marked forms. Then the existence-processes would be able to be conceived in analogy with that kind of advancing inference in which there constantly must be taken up new premises: [ l A = B A , B = C A = C A = C , C = D A = D A = ]…

=== p.342
DA: …edet som saadant, værner om det, og afgiver derved et gavnligt Korrektiv overfor den intellektuelle Interesse, ‖342‖ for hvem Billedet væsentligt maa være Grundlag for ny Analyse.…
EN: …ts and elementary laws. It is the antinomy out beyond which we do not come. The aesthetic interest, on the other hand, is attached to the whole-picture itself as such, guards it, and thereby yields a useful corrective over against the intellectual interest, for which the picture essentially must be ground for new analysis.…

=== p.344
DA: …sofens sidste Pligt er det redelige intellektuelle Opgør. Han taber ikke Modet, fordi ikke alle intellektuelle ‖344‖ „Blomsterdrømme“ modnedes. Der er Arbejde nok, ikke mindst Arbejde for at føre Forstaaelse…
EN: …The philosopher's last duty is the honest intellectual reckoning. He does not lose courage because not all intellectual ``flower-dreams'' ripened. There is work enough, not least work to carry the understanding of the objects, as well as the human spirit's own self-understanding, further forward and deeper in. Perhaps Goethe is right that the human being is not created to solv…

=== p.345
DA: …intet menneskeligt Arbejde være at udføre, og da vilde al Vurdering være illusorisk. Kun naar der er Hæmninger ‖345‖ og Hindringer, der kunde overvindes ved menneskeligt Arbejde, faar Undersøgelsen af Værdib…
EN: …verything either consisted in eternal and actual completion or with sufficient energy and speed moved forward along the way that leads to completion, there would be no human work to carry out, and then all valuation would be illusory. Only when there are inhibitions and hindrances that could be overcome by human work does the investigation of the value-concepts get significance. What makes ethics possible is precisely that all individualities and totalities must struggle to subsist. It is then a matter of the carry…

=== p.347
DA: …punkt, om den har naat det; og fra dette Synspunkt har Afkølingen været af Værdi. Det er nu dette sidste Stand ‖347‖ punkt, Vurderingen stedse fører os tilbage til, saa megen Sympati vi end kunne have for St…
EN: …; from this point of view the cooling must be regarded as value-destroying. As a home for organic and psychical life it has only later reached its high point, if it has reached it; and from this point of view the cooling has been of value. It is now this last standpoint that valuation constantly leads us back to, however much sympathy we may have for star-existences. The fundamental thing in the value-concept is a striving, a need, that can be favored or counteracted. By the way of analogy we can lay such a strivin…

=== p.348
DA: …t og hævde Normen. En hel Række middelbare Værdier udspringe her som Forudsætninger for den umiddelbare Værdis ‖348‖ Virkeliggørelse. En anden Række af Problemer opstaar ved, at Værdi staar mod Værdi indenfo…
EN: …er means and ways can be found. The value-concept then engenders concepts like purpose and norm (101, 2), and there arises a struggle to reach the purpose and maintain the norm. A whole series of mediate values springs up here as presuppositions for the immediate value's realization. Another series of problems arises from the fact that value stands against value within the same whole. Within the single individual, organic, economic, intellectual, aesthetic, ethical, and religious values can stand against each other…

=== p.349
DA: …Begrebet Grundværdi indenfor Vurderingen svarer til ‖349‖ Begrebet Urfænomen indenfor Verdensanskuelsen, og Forholdet mellem Grundværdien og andre V…
EN: …The concept fundamental value within valuation corresponds to the concept primal phenomenon within the world-view, and the relation between the fundamental value and other values corresponds to the criterion of reality within cognition. There will constantly be a greater or smaller, involuntary or consciously stri…

=== p.351
DA: …indre Emner, fra først af en social Karakter. Som det tilegner sig Sproget, og altsaa former sin Trang til at ‖351‖ give sine Sindsbevægelser, sine Erfaringer og sine Tanker Udtryk efter Omgivelsernes Forbi…
EN: … human individual comes to be within a group and involuntarily lives itself into its ordering and its psychical atmosphere, the way in which it strives to harmonize its inner objects gets from the first a social character. As it appropriates language, and thus shapes its need to give its emotions, its experiences, and its thoughts expression after the surroundings' model, so it is also the social models and the commands handed down in the group that shape its life of will. Only when the involuntary security that tr…

=== p.352
DA: …Energien idethele og volde et afgørende Tab for Sjælehelheden. Hvor Trangen ikke ophæves ved, at Næringen und ‖352‖ drages, maa der vækkes en anden Trang eller Drift, der kan hæmme den første. Som rent nega…
EN: … A need or a drive can indeed die a natural death from lack of nourishment; but such a dying-off will easily consume the energy on the whole and cause a decisive loss for the soul-whole. Where the need is not abolished by the nourishment's being withdrawn, another need or drive must be awakened that can hamper the first. As a purely negative virtue self-mastery is psychologically impossible. On the other hand it is possible that a change of direction of the energy working in the need or drive can happen by the infl…

=== p.353
DA: …Karakter indtager des højere et Trin, jo større en Fylde af Interesser og Tanker, der er forenet i den ved en ‖353‖ Grundværdi bestemte Villiesstrøm. Det er i og for sig et rent formalt Kriterium. En Djævel…
EN: …forms itself in accordance with the concept psychical energy (synthesis) (see 1). Already here there can be talk of lower and higher steps. A character occupies the higher a step, the greater a fullness of interests and thoughts is united in it in the will-stream determined by a fundamental value. It is in and for itself a purely formal criterion. A devil can be a character as well as an angel. And the character-development can moreover hold the greatest oppositions, if only the holding-together energy is so much t…

=== p.354
DA: …amfundets aandelige og materielle Magt over de Enkelte. Dette er nu ogsaa indrømmet i det Foregaaende: hverken ‖354‖ Personlighedens Grundlæggelse eller dens Frigørelse er mulig uden i og ved den sociale Atm…
EN: …ogical standpoint (cf. 40) one will say that this whole presentation is too individualistic. The ethical exists—one says—only through society's spiritual and material power over the single individuals. This is now also admitted in the foregoing: neither the personality's founding nor its liberation is possible except in and by the social atmosphere in which the single one comes to be and develops. But an ethical problem first comes to be when the reciprocal action that constantly takes place between individual and …

=== p.355
DA: …ringer af dennes Konsekvenser. Den Enkelte spørger, hvorfor han skal give Samfundet Mere, end det kan aftvinge ‖355‖ ham, naar han dog kan leve helt og fuldt i sin egen lille Verden, i sine Interesser og sit…
EN: …ith a morality.—It is true that the intellectual doubts first became possible with the advancing individualization; they are at bottom only formulations of its consequences. The single one asks why he is to give society more than it can extort from him, when he can after all live wholly and fully in his own little world, in his interests and his work. It is also true that it is not merely thought's business to remedy the difficulties. But it is not easy to understand what is meant by its being our first duty to pro…

=== p.356
DA: …rfaringer, det Resultat af Generationers ofte skæbnesvangre Virken og Liden, der er nedlagt i Samfundsordenen. ‖356‖ For mit eget Vedkommende er jeg ganske klar over, at den individuelle Etik kun kan forstaa…
EN: …can have run too early from school; it can with unjustified self-satisfaction set its often slender reason against the immeasurable aggregate of experiences, the result of generations' often fateful working and suffering, that is deposited in the social order. For my own part I am quite clear that the individual ethics can only be understood as a member of the social ethics: ``The concepts society and race have the ethical significance of pointing partly to the immeasurable in the life-interests that are to be take…

=== p.357
DA: …paa, at den medfører for megen Individualisering, men netop paa, at den yder for liden Udvikling af de enkelte ‖357‖ Personligheder, da saa mange af disse kun faa Anledning til at udvikle en enkelt, elementæ…
EN: …ces. Not around, but through the advancing individualization goes the way to the new society. Provisionally the critique of the division of labor is not that it brings with it too much individualization, but precisely that it yields too little development of the single personalities, since so many of these only get occasion to develop a single, elementary side of their nature.…

=== p.358
DA: …en som Helhed. Dette er Tilfældet i Opofrelsens store Øjeblikke, de Øjeblikke, i hvilket Mennesket, som Aristo ‖358‖ teles siger, „hellere vil udføre en stor og skøn Handling end mange smaa“, og saaledes er…
EN: …le life is represented by the single moment or the single need, so that when these do not get their full right, the personality as whole is denied. This is the case in the great moments of sacrifice, the moments in which the human being, as Aristotle says, ``would rather carry out one great and beautiful action than many small ones,'' and thus it is where the human being sees his whole life's calling in the fulfillment of a single need. Then too the continuity, the inner connection in life, is preserved. Of the val…

=== p.359
DA: …150. Den formelle Etik frembyder saaledes analoge Træk ‖359‖ paa realt og kvalitativt set helt forskellige Standpunkter. Det har, som jeg har søgt at v…
EN: …150. The formal ethics thus offers analogous traits on really and qualitatively quite different standpoints. It has, as I have sought to show, its ground in the fact that it is everywhere the relation between a whole and its elements that lies at the ground. There is therefore also a circle of formal ethical concep…

=== p.360
DA: …Enkelte. Enhver etisk Tankegang gælder kun under Forudsætning af en bestemt Grundværdi. Forholdet mellem Grund ‖360‖ værdi og de enkelte Værdier udredes gennem Anvendelse af de formale etiske Begreber. Den,…
EN: …ence and development can be the fundamental value that assigns all other values their place and thus determines the valuation in the particular. Every ethical train of thought holds only under presupposition of a definite fundamental value. The relation between fundamental value and the single values is unraveled through application of the formal ethical concepts. He who acknowledges a fundamental value and is sufficiently acquainted with the actual relations under which it is to be maintained can be logically forc…

=== p.362
DA: …er med her, er et omstridt Spørgsmaal. Men muligvis medvirke Mutationer, ligesom i Planteverdenen, snart begun ‖362‖ stigende, snart hæmmende de fuldbyrdede Forskydningers Virkninger. I alle Tilfælde kan hel…
EN: …, upbringing, customs, traditions, and institutions influence the new generations' development from the beginning. Whether physical, not merely social, heredity works along here is a disputed question. But possibly mutations work along, just as in the plant-world, now favoring, now hampering the accomplished displacements' effects. In all cases this whole development cannot be understood by the influence of clearly conscious motives. It is here, as so often, first the results that emerge over consciousness's thresh…

=== p.363
DA: …virke tilbage paa Samfundet. Hvorvidt Isolationen eller Emancipationen kan gaa, vil være forskelligt i de for ‖363‖ skellige Tilfælde; fuldstændig vil den aldrig kunne blive. Men disse Muligheder ere af sto…
EN: …s, as already indicated, at the same time precisely those processes that make it possible for the individual to set itself in opposition to society, seek new ways, and thereby perhaps again react back on society. How far the isolation or the emancipation can go will be different in the different cases; complete it can never become. But these possibilities are of great significance, especially in critical times, and when the sociological ethics has an inclination to overlook or despise them, it approaches in a suspi…

=== p.364
DA: …nkelte Personlighed staa de forskellige Interesser og Tilskyndelser mod hverandre. Alle disse forskellige Bryd ‖364‖ ninger hænge sammen indbyrdes og staa i stadig Vexelvirkning. Tilsammen bevirke de, at der…
EN: … proposition that it is easier to say what wrong is than what right is—investigated in his famous work. I would add that within the single personality the different interests and promptings stand against each other. All these different conflicts hang together mutually and stand in constant reciprocal action. Together they bring about that there does not take place an evenly advancing development through history, as regards the fundamental values. Through serious and often deep-going crises of individual and social …

=== p.365
DA: …aske ofte vanskeligt høres midt i Kamplarmen. Men der kommer Stansninger, hvor Sindet er i Ro (animus sedatus, ‖365‖ som Hobbes sagde), og hvor der kan blive Lydhørhed. Et saadant aandeligt Vindstille (Demok…
EN: …otives,'' finally grounds his social theory on the postulate that the human being ought never to be treated as mere means! Ethical ideas can perhaps often be heard only with difficulty in the midst of the din of battle. But there come stoppages where the mind is at rest (animus sedatus, as Hobbes said), and where there can be an attentive ear. Such a spiritual calm (Democritus's γαλήνη) also presupposes the conception and carrying-through of the great thought on which ``historical materialism'' rests. The ethicist …

=== p.366
DA: …den Enkelte staar som anerkendt efter sin Ejendommelighed, og Hengivelsestrangen sker ogsaa Fyldest, idet Hen ‖366‖ synet til en omfattende Tingenes Orden bestemmer den Enkeltes Plads og Opgave. Retfærdighe…
EN: …) and according to its significance for the group (society, race) to which it belongs. Justice lets the self-assertion come to its right, in that the single one stands as acknowledged according to its peculiarity, and the need for devotion too is satisfied, in that the regard for a comprehensive order of things determines the single one's place and task. Justice can, psychologically and historically regarded, develop out of self-assertion, in that this is limited over against other personal beings' self-assertion a…

=== p.367
DA: …nds Vegne, appellerer fra det ufuldkomment udviklede Samfund til et mere fuldkomment Samfund. Saaledes kan den ‖367‖ individuelle Samvittighed voxe frem af den sociale. Overgangen er træffende udtalt i et Fr…
EN: …of these and itself utters norms that are formed in analogy with the norms that formerly were maintained on the group's behalf. He then speaks on an ideal society's behalf, appeals from the imperfectly developed society to a more perfect society. Thus the individual conscience can grow forth out of the social. The transition is aptly declared in a fragment of Democritus: ``Learn to feel shame before yourself more than before others.''…

=== p.368
DA: …stiller sine Fordringer. Men Gruppens Velfærd kræver ogsaa kraftig Selvhævdelse hos de Enkelte, og Individets ‖368‖ Velfærd kræver en kraftig Udvikling af Samfundslivet. Retfærdighedsbegrebet fyldestgør all…
EN: …In self-assertion it is apparently only the individual's welfare, in devotion apparently only the group's welfare, that poses its demands. But the group's welfare too requires vigorous self-assertion in the single ones, and the individual's welfare requires a vigorous development of the social life. The concept of justice satisfies all these interests, not by external accommodation, but through a purification and clarification of both tendencies. The blind need has in ``the flower of all virtues'' r…

=== p.369
DA: …skal komme til at forsynde sig mod sin egen højeste Grundsætning, den, at Enhver skal behandles baade som Maal ‖369‖ og som Middel. Mennesket skal ikke paa noget Punkt gøres til blot Middel for Formaal, der…
EN: … a thoroughgoing individualization of the ethical task—not merely in order that it can really become the same for all, but also in order that ethics shall not come to sin against its own highest fundamental principle, that everyone is to be treated both as goal and as means. The human being is not at any point to be made into mere means for purposes that—in any case provisionally—lie beyond his horizon. The ethical demand is not to come as a foreign command from a world beyond, but is to have its hold in the single…

=== p.370
DA: …ndslivets Fornødenheder tilfredsstilles. Enten anerkendes der ikke andre aandelige Fornødenheder end netop den ‖370‖ religiøse Trang, en Higen mod det ene Fornødne. Eller ogsaa formaar Religionen at optage a…
EN: …s holds quite especially of the religious problem. In religion's classical times it stands as the one, concentrated form in which all the life of spirit's necessities are satisfied. Either no other spiritual necessities are acknowledged than precisely the religious need, a yearning toward the one thing needful. Or else religion manages to take up all other spiritual endeavors into itself. It is then not merely help and consolation, but is poetry, morality, and science at once, or manages in any case to take up all …

=== p.371
DA: …Begrebet Religion er et historisk-psykologisk Begreb, der ‖371‖ fremtræder i saa mange Former og Nuancer, at det kan være vanskeligt at sige, hvor dets Om…
EN: …The concept religion is a historical-psychological concept that appears in so many forms and nuances that it can be difficult to say where its domain begins and where it ends. The different standpoints in the face of the religious problem hang together partly with this multiplicity. What interests philosophy in thi…

=== p.373
DA: …te af de indre Bevægelser i Sindet, om ikke den Higen og Tragten, der fandt sin Fyldestgørelse og sit Udtryk i ‖373‖ Religionerne, og indenfor disse førte til Udvikling af ideale Former, kan bestaa under hel…
EN: … folk-religions that alone are of interest nowadays for the discussion of the religious problem. And the question then becomes whether the most essential of the inner movements in the mind, whether the yearning and striving that found its satisfaction and its expression in the religions, and within these led to development of ideal forms, cannot subsist under quite other forms,—whether one then further will call it religious or not.…

=== p.374
DA: …in Religionsfilosofi har jeg søgt at vise, at de religiøse Forestillinger ikke besvare vore Problemer, hverken ‖374‖ de store eller de smaa. Dette fra den erkendelsesteoretiske Side. Dernæst har jeg ment som…
EN: …156. In my Philosophy of Religion I have sought to show that the religious representations do not answer our problems, neither the great nor the small. This from the epistemological side. Next I have held as the kernel of religion on all steps to find a need and will to hold fast the subsistence of life's values out beyond the limit within which human will can work for them. I…

=== p.375
DA: …hed, Skønhed og Godhed ere derimod Værdier, der svare til de intellektuelle, æstetiske og etiske Fornødenheder ‖375‖ (Se 101). Disse forskellige Værdier antage i Løbet af det menneskelige Aandslivs Udvikling…
EN: …rresponds a value. To hunger and thirst and other kinds of life-feeling and self-preservation-need there correspond what one could call organic values; truth, beauty, and goodness are on the other hand values that correspond to the intellectual, aesthetic, and ethical necessities (see 101). These different values take on in the course of the human life of spirit's development more and more independence and are realized each by its own way. To which need does religion then correspond, and where is the place in the h…

=== p.376
DA: …ligionen, hvor den udspringer paa første Haand. Al Religion er da en bevidst eller ubevidst Tro paa Værdiernes ‖376‖ Kontinuitet, ad hvilken Vej og ved hvilke Kræfter man saa tænker sig denne Kontinuitet opn…
EN: …lues? Out of anxiety at seeing all goods dwindle away, or out of enthusiasm at seeing again and again the value-stream spring forth with new force, religion springs, where it springs at first hand. All religion is then a conscious or unconscious belief in the values' continuity, by whatever way and by whatever forces one then imagines this continuity attained.…

=== p.377
DA: …uppe eller Konfession) i utallige Nuancer, som psykologisk Iagttagelse og Analyse kun lige er begyndt at efter ‖377‖ spore. Af Menneskenes religiøse Forestillinger, f. Ex. deres Forestillinger om Guddommen e…
EN: …ses in existence rests on what for the human being at the given step stands as fundamental value. Religion therefore varies (even within the same group or confession) in countless nuances, which psychological observation and analysis have only just begun to trace. From human beings' religious representations, e.g. their representations of the deity or of another life, one does not learn to know so much their understanding as one learns what lies nearest their heart; it is that on whose subsistence they have a need …

=== p.378
DA: …undet en Grundstemning, som paa en Gang har Karakteren af Alvor — formedelst det Store, der er oplevet, og den ‖378‖ Smerte, det ofte har kostet, — og af Ironi overfor ethvert Forsøg paa i Billeder eller i B…
EN: …aracter. There is, on the other hand, a standpoint on which, through life's mixture of tragedy and comedy, of victory and defeat, there is won a fundamental mood that at once has the character of seriousness—by reason of the great thing that has been experienced, and the pain it has often cost,—and of irony in the face of every attempt to want to express in pictures or in concepts what in its fullness and by its oppositions bursts every form one tries to fix. The view of life or feeling of life that thus arises hol…

=== p.379
DA: …i Menneskelivet, og dog forstaar den den Respekt for Middelalderens Klosterbevægelse, Kierkegaard krævede. Den ‖379‖ frembyder selvfølgeligt hos dem, der nære den, mange Grader og mange Nuancer. Den forudsæt…
EN: …at Kierkegaard consciously and passionately closed his eyes to. It does not set the cloister's experiences above the experiences that can be made in the midst of human life, and yet it understands the respect for the Middle Ages' cloister-movement that Kierkegaard demanded. It offers of course, in those who nourish it, many degrees and many nuances. It presupposes reflection and critique, at the same time as it presupposes a living experience and a deep sympathy. It cannot be learned from others, not propagated and…

=== p.380
DA: …er de uendelige Stridigheder paa det religiøse Omraade kunne faa Øje paa. Men hverken Troende eller Fritænkere ‖380‖ have endnu virkelig Sans for denne Side af Sagen, der dog er den egentligt menneskelige, o…
EN: …a life-type must we be said to have before us. Toward the acknowledgment of such a measure we move slowly. It is the only flash of light we, after the endless strifes in the religious domain, can catch sight of. But neither believers nor freethinkers have yet a real sense for this side of the matter, which is nevertheless the properly human one, and which at the same time opens access to seeing a greater, hidden connection in human life of spirit behind all kinds of confessions and denials.…

=== p.381
DA: …oversætte i den rene Tankens Form. Tankens Syntese kunde altsaa optage det personlige Livs hele Syntese i sig. ‖381‖ Ikke-Filosofer maatte saa lade sig nøje med Religionens Billeder og Ceremonier. Det religi…
EN: …y. How it went in Denmark with this promise in the course of the nineteenth century I have presented in my book Danske Filosofer. Characteristic was especially the position toward the century's middle. For J. L. Heiberg religion was an object that philosophy, as Hegel had developed it, could completely take up and translate into pure thought's form. Thought's synthesis could thus take up the personal life's whole synthesis into itself. Non-philosophers must then content themselves with religion's pictures and ceremonies. The religious content got for Heiberg as for Hegel only justification so far as it could be converted or translated into purely logical form. Martensen was indeed in agreement with Heiberg that logic (especially as Hegel had developed it) was the form in which the dogma should and could be developed in theology as science, but he required beforehand an express belief in …

=== p.382
DA: …leve sig ind i, ligesom han har levet sig ind i sit Modersmaal. Den Enkelte kan finde Styrkelse ved Samkvemmet ‖382‖ med Andre, ogsaa naar det gælder at finde Form og Udtryk for sine egne inderligste Erfarin…
EN: …gions, e.g. to holding fast the one in which he himself is brought up. It can be a support for the single one that there are spiritual life-forms he can live himself into, just as he has lived himself into his mother-tongue. The single one can find strengthening through intercourse with others, also when it is a matter of finding form and expression for his own innermost experiences. And there can stir an anxiety at going alone along life's dark ways. But it is also a fact that there can arise a relation of opposit…

=== p.383
DA: …aar sin fulde Bekræftelse, naar den kan vendes om, saaledes at man ved streng Slutning ligesaa vel kan gaa til ‖383‖ bage fra Virkning til Aarsag som fra Aarsag til Virkning (108; 115). Naar Videnskaben søge…
EN: …e given case. One must constantly be able to make a counter-test when a causal relation is to be proved. Even science becomes more and more clear that a hypothesis gets its full confirmation only when it can be reversed, so that one by strict inference can just as well go back from effect to cause as from cause to effect (108; 115). When science seeks to lay off its dogmatism, religion ought also to do so. Involuntarily the single one will perhaps declare that life and existence would lose their value for him if he…

=== p.384
DA: …r helt andre Forhold og skaffe sig Udtryk paa helt anden Maade. I denne Forstand ere de historisk foreliggende ‖384‖ Religioner Emner for Tanken, medens de ikke kunne være Autoriteter.…
EN: …gle ones' confessions and the ecclesiastical hymns and usages seek effects and pictures of human experiences that perhaps can be made again under quite other conditions and provide themselves expression in quite another way. In this sense the historically existing religions are objects for thought, while they cannot be authorities.…

=== p.385
DA: …noget Mere end en saadan Forudsætning. Der vil være en Trang til at finde Udtryk for den samlede Livserfaring ‖385‖ i en Livspoesi, ved hvilken de overleverede Billeder kunne bruges, naar Fantasien ikke paa…
EN: …On the other side there will surely constantly be a need for something more than such a presupposition. There will be a need to find expression for the gathered life-experience in a life-poetry, with which the traditional pictures can be used when fantasy cannot on its own produce new ones. Poetry always springs from a vigorous living, and that the religions have managed to give the impulse to so great and mighty a poetry hangs…

=== p.386
DA: …rfor enhver Religion, og selv de mest objektive Sociologer opkaste det, skønt denne Side af Sagen interesserer ‖386‖ dem meget lidet. Saa vigtigt det er at faa at vide, hvilken Kultus der øves, — hvilke Fore…
EN: …1) The question why gods are worshipped must be raised in the face of every religion, and even the most objective sociologists raise it, though this side of the matter interests them very little. However important it is to get to know which cult is exercised,—which representations are attached to this cult,—and which dogmas again unfold themselves from these representations,—one nevertheless reaches a real characterization of religi…

=== p.387
DA: …em hos Platon, naar han taler om „Ideerne" som det, der gør Gud guddommelig (πρὸς οἷσπερ θεὸς ὢν θεῖος ἐστιν), ‖387‖ og senere hos Plotinos, naar han udtaler, at Grunden til, at Guderne ere Guder, selv maa v…
EN: …ce between the ethical and the religious finally falls away. This standpoint, which hangs together with the transition from animism to Platonism (43–44), already comes forward in Plato, when he speaks of ``the ideas'' as that which makes God divine (πρὸς οἷσπερ θεὸς ὢν θεῖος ἐστιν), and later in Plotinus, when he declares that the ground why the gods are gods must itself be ``a higher God'' than they!—The divine becomes, on this interpretation, a union of the highest values and of the power to develop and maintain …

=== p.388
DA: …ste Tid have Religionspsykologer fremhævet Modsætningen mellem de én Gang fødte og de to Gange fødte, d. v. s. ‖388‖ mellem Mennesker, hvis Udvikling gaar i lige Linie, saa at de optage Lykke og Ulykke som E…
EN: …life value. The peoples' fates mirror themselves in their religions, and the single one's dispensations in his view of life's timbre. In the most recent time psychologists of religion have emphasized the opposition between the once-born and the twice-born, that is, between human beings whose development goes in a straight line, so that they take up happiness and unhappiness as elements in their view of life without any break taking place,—and human beings who from inner and outer causes are led to a break with the …

=== p.389
DA: …rvidt der paa dette Omraade kan være Tale om almenmenneskelige Erfaringer. Det vil da ogsaa vise sig, hvorvidt ‖389‖ der paa rent menneskelig Grund kan udvikle sig psykiske Ækvivalenter for den store Koncent…
EN: …he values' fate, is no more so quite predominantly as hitherto determined beforehand by tradition and authority, then it will first properly show itself how far in this domain there can be talk of universally human experiences. It will then also show itself how far on purely human ground there can develop psychical equivalents for the great concentration in the life of spirit that the religions in their classical times have managed to bring. —…

=== p.390
DA: …ode, hvor der anvendtes Magi, medens der endnu ikke var Religion. Først da Mennesket havde gjort den Erfaring, ‖390‖ at de Kræfter, han selv kan sætte i Bevægelse, ikke slaa til, altsaa da han havde erfaret…
EN: …e. In cult, on the other hand, there is opened to him access to receive help and communication of divine forces. According to Frazer there was a period where magic was applied while there was not yet religion. Only when the human being had made the experience that the forces he himself can set in motion do not suffice, thus when he had experienced his dependence, did he bow before higher powers. It was then through resignation that religion came to be. The human being first believed himself able by his own forces t…

=== p.391
DA: …oser kunne give, ville Selvvidnesbyrd af religiøse Personligheder være. De vise os umiddelbart, hvad der giver ‖391‖ Religionen Værdi for Mennesker. Vi kunne ikke derved lære Religionens rent historiske Opri…
EN: …sive purification of the lurking, sly heavenly magician into the Zoroastrian god's spiritual loftiness lie a proof of mighty changes in religious representations and human morality. Of still greater interest for the philosopher than the insights into the inner mental processes that cult-forms' and gods' metamorphoses can give, would be self-testimonies of religious personalities. They show us immediately what gives religion value for human beings. We cannot thereby learn to know religion's purely historical origin. On the contrary, such self-testimonies as a rule presuppose a definite historical religion and its proclamation as given. But what for the philosopher is more important: we can get to know what place religion occupies in the life of spirit, as this appears in significant personalities. When the religious life has a purely instinctive character and is immediately determined by …

=== p.392
DA: …Undersøgelse af dette Punkt. Et religiøst Fænomen forstaas kun ret som Følge af saadan Vexelvirkning. Saa stor ‖392‖ Betydning man end vil tillægge „Folkespykologien", maa det dog aldrig glemmes, at Folket b…
EN: …great interest to investigate the reciprocal relation between tradition and the single personalities, thus between the social and the individual moment in religion. In my ``Philosophy of Religion'' I have therefore also, with the use of a series of historical examples, made a special investigation of this point. A religious phenomenon is understood rightly only as a consequence of such reciprocal action. However great a significance one will ascribe to ``folk-psychology,'' it must nevertheless never be forgotten that the people consists of individuals, and that the people's mental life goes on in their souls. Therefore it must be of significance to get immediate access to one of the hearths for the people's mental life. —…
