# relation-som-kategori: 171 Danish / 183 English paragraphs; 159 of 171 aligned one-to-one
# For each turn write a line in anchors-en.txt:  N|English words that begin page N (verbatim, 4-8 words)

=== p.4
DA: …edes som denne lægger sig for Dagen i Videnskabernes Historie. Baade ved de Spørgsmaal, Tanken stiller, og ved ‖4‖ de Svar, den anerkender, lægger visse Former sig for Dagen, som det er Kategorilærens, den…
EN: …ly, partly by so-called sound common sense (sens commun), the pre-scientific thinking, partly by scientific thinking, as the latter displays itself in the history of the sciences. Both in the questions thought puts, and in the answers it acknowledges, certain forms display themselves, which it is the task of the doctrine of the categories, of descriptive epistemology, to bring out and to order. The two principal sources for the doctrine of the categories are the psychological study of ``sound common sense'' and the…

=== p.5
DA: …er bringes i bestemte Forhold til hverandre, og givne Helheder forstaas kun ved Paavisning af de indre og ydre ‖5‖ Relationer, der er afgørende for deres Bestaaen. Relation viser sig derfor at være en væse…
EN: …both cases the concept of the whole shows itself to hang together with the concept of relation. Wholes can be formed only by objects being brought into definite relations to one another, and given wholes are understood only by the demonstration of the inner and outer relations that are decisive for their subsistence. Relation therefore shows itself to be an essential form of thought in every domain. To think is to find definite relations, to set one object in relation to another; and the most general relations show…

=== p.6
DA: …kom Relation til at spille en aldeles afgørende Rolle, og her trænger den i Den menneskelige Tanke givne Over ‖6‖ sigt til en vigtig Supplering. Karakteristisk for denne senere græske Tænkning, inden Myst…
EN: …on. Aristotle himself names as examples of relation: equality and inequality, cause and effect, knowledge and the known. But in later Greek thinking relation came to play an altogether decisive part, and here the overview given in ``Den menneskelige Tanke'' needs an important supplementing. Characteristic of this later Greek thinking, before mysticism made its influence felt, was the critical-sceptical direction it struck out upon. Plato stands, in spite of his speculative striving, as a precursor of this direction…

=== p.7
DA: …re Forestillinger, men den skal finde Bekræftelse ved sin Sammenhæng med andre Forestillinger, ligesom Lægerne ‖7‖ ved deres Diagnoser ikke holder sig til noget enkelt Kendemærke, men støtter sig til Samme…
EN: …le presentation whatever. The validity of a presentation can rest only on its agreement with other presentations. It must not merely be ἀπερίστατος, not contradicted by other presentations, but it must find confirmation through its connexion with other presentations, just as physicians in their diagnoses do not hold to any single mark, but rely on the connexion between all the marks (συνδρομὴ τῶν σημείων). Further, there must in all important cases be required an ``analysing review'' of all the relations that have …

=== p.8
DA: …fremherskende Betydning i vor Erkendelse udtrykker enhver vunden Forstaaelse visse bestemte Forhold og gælder ‖8‖ kun for dem, er forsaavidt relativ . Men Relation som Kategori fører paa den anden Side st…
EN: …ll show itself again and again in what follows, that the concept of relation conditions at one and the same time a limit and a task. By reason of this concept's predominant significance in our knowledge, every understanding that is won expresses certain definite relations and holds only for them, is to that extent ``relative''. But relation as category leads, on the other hand, always beyond every understanding won, in that it points to the importance or the necessity of seeking new relations which can make the det…

=== p.9
DA: …ad Opfattelsesevne angaar, — til Forskellen mellem vore forskellige Sanser indbyrdes, hvorved en og samme Ting ‖9‖ kommer til at staa som forskellig for forskellige Sanser, — til den Maade, paa hvilken vor…
EN: …which in his opinion make true knowledge impossible. He points to the differences of living beings, particularly of men, as regards the faculty of apprehension, — to the difference between our various senses among themselves, whereby ``one and the same thing'' comes to stand as different for different senses, — to the way in which our states and our standpoints in space and time, particularly the distances from the object, condition our apprehension, — and to the influence of custom and law. In all he sets up 10 sp…

=== p.10
DA: …sk Videnskab, særlig i Lægeskolerne, og en videnskabelig Bevægelse i empirisk Retning var maaske, som allerede ‖10‖ bemærket, medvirkende ved selve Spørgsmaalets principielle Udspring. —…
EN: … age, as will show itself in what follows. In antiquity itself the discussion of this question formed the introduction to a purely empirical science, particularly in the schools of medicine; and a scientific movement in an empirical direction was perhaps, as already remarked, contributory to the very origin of the question in principle. —…

=== p.11
DA: …ationens Nødvendighed for Erkendelsen netop en Kilde til Fylde og Rigdom. — Jo flere Relationer der kan findes ‖11‖ og bestemmes, des større Enhed og des større Mangfoldighed vil der paa én Gang være i vor…
EN: …cteristic of all science is the relation between objects expressed in definite laws. And from this point of view the necessity of relation for knowledge becomes precisely a source of fullness and richness. — The more relations that can be found and determined, the greater the unity and the greater the manifoldness there will be at one and the same time in our knowledge.…

=== p.12
DA: …Opløsningsfænomen. Det er en ulykkelig Bevidsthed, i hvilken Tankernes indbyrdes Harmoni er brudt. Da behøves ‖12‖ der et strengt aandeligt Arbejde, for at de enkelte Tanker, trods eller netop ved deres in…
EN: …serting itself to determine their mutual relations. The arising of such a need is in his view a phenomenon of dissolution. It is an unhappy consciousness in which the mutual harmony of thoughts is broken. Then there is need of a strict spiritual work, in order that the individual thoughts, in spite of, or precisely by, their mutual oppositions, may come to stand as members of a great whole. This happens by means of the dialectical method, which at bottom means a systematization of concepts of relation. The individu…

=== p.13
DA: …Med fuld Bevidsthed har den franske Nykantianer Charles Renouvier stillet Relationsbegrebet i Spidsen for ‖13‖ sin Kategorilære. At alt er relativt — siger han — dette Skepticismens stærke Ord, var den…
EN: …With full consciousness the French Neo-Kantian Charles Renouvier has placed the concept of relation at the head of his doctrine of the categories. That everything is relative — he says — this strong word of scepticism was the last word of critical philosophy in antiquity, and it must be the first word of the modern method. And he finds a whole method contained in this …

=== p.14
DA: …klar over, at der ikke kan føres noget rationelt Bevis for Kategoriernes Gyldighed eller Kategorilistens Fuld ‖14‖ stændighed. De findes ved Analyse af Erfaringen, opstilles paa Prøve og maa stedse paany b…
EN: …amental principles, for a system of fundamental concepts to be capable of being set up. This objection does not touch Renouvier, who is clear that no rational proof can be given for the validity of the categories or the completeness of the list of categories. They are found by analysis of experience, are set up tentatively, and must always be confirmed anew by experience. Renouvier therefore reproaches Kant with having attempted a deductive grounding of the doctrine of the categories. In peculiar opposition to this…

=== p.15
DA: …t for. Ved Kategorilæren faar dette en særlig vigtig Betydning ved Forholdet mellem Værdibegreberne og de mere ‖15‖ universelle (fundamentale, formale og reale) Kategorier. Men, som jeg i femte Kapitel af A…
EN: …nt and extension. The more elements a concept contains, the narrower the circle of objects for which it holds. In the doctrine of the categories this acquires a particularly important significance through the relation between the concepts of value and the more universal (fundamental, formal and real) categories. But, as I have sought to show in the fifth chapter of the treatise ``Totalitet som Kategori'', since all value stands in relation to a certain whole and to that whole's conditions of existence, there is non…

=== p.16
DA: …ed, som allerede Kant lærte, er hypotetisk, altsaa gældende i Relation til sine Forudsætninger, vil ikke sige, ‖16‖ at saadan Nødvendighed ikke skulde være virkelig Nødvendighed. Ved al Nødvendighed maa der…
EN: …efinite relations and holds only within them, but then also holds absolutely there (provided, that is, that the relations are rightly determined). That all necessity, as Kant already taught, is hypothetical, and thus holds in relation to its presuppositions, does not mean that such necessity should not be real necessity. In all necessity the presuppositions must be asked after, for necessity consists in a relation between ground and consequent. Such a relation comes about only through the activity of thought. And f…

=== p.17
DA: …er Bevidsthedslivets Karakter sig klart for Dagen, og i dem er der netop mere end et Kaos, idet de forskellige ‖17‖ Elementer, som psykologisk Analyse kan skelne i dem, helt igennem bestemmes i deres Ejendo…
EN: …e concepts of totality and relation asserts itself. In such phenomena as memory, comparison, wonder and preference, the character of conscious life plainly displays itself, and in them there is precisely more than a chaos, in that the various elements which psychological analysis can distinguish in them are throughout determined in their peculiarity by their mutual relations. And all experience points to more primitive and simple mental phenomena having to be conceived on the analogy of these; in any case language …

=== p.18
DA: …Hvad Enkeltheder angaar, maa jeg henvise til min Fremstilling af Psykologien, der netop er bygget paa den ‖18‖ Grundtanke, at Forholdslovens Gyldighed for de sjælelige Fænomener godtgør Bevidsthedens K…
EN: …As regards particulars, I must refer to my presentation of psychology, which is built precisely on the fundamental thought that the validity of the law of relation for mental phenomena establishes the character of consciousness as synthesis. Only a few principal features shall be recalled here.…

=== p.19
DA: …staa en vis bestemt Forestilling, er det Forhold, i hvilket denne Forestilling staar til andre Forestillinger. ‖19‖ Man har vel forsøgt at tillægge enhver Forestilling en Slags Selvopholdelsestrang, saa at…
EN: …(which in their simplest form are reproduced sensations), it shows itself that the condition for a certain definite presentation arising at a definite moment is the relation in which this presentation stands to other presentations. It has indeed been attempted to ascribe to every presentation a sort of impulse to self-preservation, so that, as soon as other presentations (or sensations) do not lay claim to the psychical energy, it would ``of itself'' step forth into consciousness. But even so there are definite rel…

=== p.20
DA: …flere forskellige Relationer, der er afgørende for en Følelse, des ejendommeligere og rigere vil denne Følelse ‖20‖ være. Ved enhver saadan rigt udformet Følelse vil det blive Spørgsmaalet, om den kan hævde…
EN: …finite magnitude of the gain or the progress experienced, but also on the relation to the level of feeling that was already present beforehand. The more different relations that are decisive for a feeling, the more peculiar and rich that feeling will be. With every such richly formed feeling the question will be whether it can maintain itself in face of the new relations in which mental life may be placed. Thus for example when the humorist is met by tragic fates, or when a hard-won consolation is to stand its test…

=== p.21
DA: …et er af afgørende Betydning, paa hvilket Punkt af et Individs Udvikling en Handlingsmulighed optræder; derpaa ‖21‖ vil det bero, om et vist Motiv overhovedet kan blive til, og om det kan blive det sejrende…
EN: …at can become a motive for an individual rests on the individual's character and previous history. Motives are never relationless. It is of decisive significance at what point of an individual's development a possibility of action appears; on that will depend whether a certain motive can come about at all, and whether it can become the victorious one.…

=== p.22
DA: …ne Ejendommelighed ved Sjælelivet, skelner mellem Hvilepladser og Flyvepladser indenfor Bevidsthedens Strøm og ‖22‖ mener, at vi har en Tilbøjelighed til at holde os til Hvilepladserne. Tydeligere udtrykker…
EN: …nd to overlook the relations that condition the transition from one such point to another. William James, who has excellently illuminated this peculiarity of mental life, distinguishes between resting-places and flying-places within the stream of consciousness, and holds that we have an inclination to keep to the resting-places. He expresses himself more plainly when he speaks of substantive and transitive parts of our inner life, and holds that we are inclined to ascribe to the former an absolutely independent sub…

=== p.23
DA: …r bleven sig mere eller mindre klart bevidst, kan overføres til andre Led end de oprindelige. En vigtig Maade, ‖23‖ hvorpaa dette kan ske, er følgende. Vi ordner uvilkaarlig vore Emner efter Lighed og Forsk…
EN: …On the transition between psychology and epistemology lies the question whether, and how, a relation of which one has become more or less clearly conscious can be transferred to terms other than the original ones. An important way in which this can happen is the following. We involuntarily order our objects according to likeness and difference. Thereby series are formed, and it may then show itself that in such a series a term can be pushed out and the relation nonetheless continue to hold betw…

=== p.24
DA: …, saa at de sættes paa nye Steder, men Forholdet imellem dem vedbliver at være det samme. I simpleste Tilfælde ‖24‖ foreligger saadan Flytning, naar der foreligger en Relation mellem to nye Led (X og Y), og…
EN: …, A remained standing, but C could enter into the same relation to A as B had had. The question now arises whether one cannot move both compass-legs, so that they are set at new places, but the relation between them continues to be the same. In the simplest case such a shift is present when there is a relation between two new terms (X and Y), and this relation is then recognized as the same as the one already known between two earlier terms (A and B). Such recognition can — like the recognition of qualities — be ei…

=== p.25
DA: …isse igen i Rækkers Rækker. Et Eksempel paa Overgangen viser Udviklingen af Talbegrebet fra Talkvalitet gennem ‖25‖ Løbenummer til Antal, og derfra igen til de forskellige Funktionsbegreber.…
EN: …and mathematical thinking, which handles relations as simple qualities that can become terms in new series, and these again in series of series. An example of the transition is shown by the development of the concept of number from quality of number through ordinal number to cardinal number, and thence again to the various concepts of function.…

=== p.26
DA: …t efter hans Opfattelse kunde intet Tankearbejde komme til at begynde. Spinoza's Hævden af de evige Attributer ‖26‖ som absolute Identiteter forudsatte, at alt Tankearbejde var gjort. De to Tænkere endte, h…
EN: …ough such contention does thought obtain its definite tasks and can begin to work. Hume's assertion of chaotic elements as what is properly given meant that on his conception no work of thought could come to begin. Spinoza's assertion of the eternal attributes as absolute identities presupposed that all work of thought was done. The two thinkers ended, each in his own way, in relations that really were not relations at all.…

=== p.27
DA: …s. I nyeste Tid har Meyerson stærkt og paa meget lærerig Maade fremhævet, at det er ganske den samme Tænkning, ‖27‖ der øves i Naturvidenskab, Filosofi og sund Menneskeforstand (sens commun). Dog gaar han i…
EN: … concept has for psychology. Like the other fundamental categories, this concept is one in which psychology and epistemology meet. In the most recent time Meyerson has strongly and in a very instructive way emphasized that it is quite the same thinking that is practised in natural science, philosophy and sound common sense (sens commun). He does not, however, go more closely into the stages and paths by which practical thinking successively approaches science. He thus does not emphasize the significance of doubt as…

=== p.28
DA: …nen antager Karakter af Modsætning, Splid og Spænding, at det sammenfattende Arbejde ret kan komme til Bevidst ‖28‖ hed. Heri ligger netop Tvivlens Betydning. Og den stadige Korrelation mellem Syntese og Re…
EN: …Kant says that we only seldom become conscious of the function that lies at the basis of synthesis, it is because it is only when the relation assumes the character of opposition, discord and tension that the comprehending work can properly come to consciousness. Herein lies precisely the significance of doubt. And the constant correlation between synthesis and relation shows itself in this, that doubt and problems exist only so long as different objects, in spite of ever so sharp an opposition or contradiction bet…

=== p.29
DA: …holdet mellem Kontinuitet og Diskontinuitet er analogt det mellem Syntese og Relation, eller er en speciellere ‖29‖ Form for dette. Syntesen gaar des lettere, jo færre Afbrydelser der sker. Om muligt optage…
EN: …The relation between continuity and discontinuity is analogous to that between synthesis and relation, or is a more special form of it. Synthesis proceeds the more easily the fewer interruptions occur. If possible, such interruptions are involuntarily taken up into the intuition (in that this is more definitely articulated) or into the judgment (in that its terms receive addi…

=== p.30
DA: …d uafhængig, Opstaaen af nye organiske Arter, nye Problemer. Selve Mutationslærens Grundlægger, Hugo de Vries, ‖30‖ har straks udtalt, at Mutationerne betyder ligesaa mange Problemer. Den moderne Kvantalære…
EN: …solution. Analogously, in biology the doctrine of mutation, which asserts the sudden arising of new organic species independently of outer relations, signifies new problems. The founder of the doctrine of mutation himself, Hugo de Vries, at once stated that the mutations signify just so many problems. The modern quantum doctrine in physics, according to which energy is not released in a continuous way but in leaps, is sought to be more closely grounded through the demonstration of mathematical laws according to whi…

=== p.31
DA: …ette Forhold bedre end Henri Poincaré, især i følgende Udtalelse: Denne Kamp vil vare, saa længe man vil dyrke ‖31‖ Videnskab, saa længe Menneskeheden vil tænke, thi den udspringer af to uforsonlige Tendens…
EN: …mes to stand in the first rank, but in such a way that the struggle between them will always begin anew. No investigator has illuminated this relation better than Henri Poincaré, especially in the following statement: ``This struggle will last as long as men will cultivate science, as long as humanity will think, for it springs from two irreconcilable tendencies in the human mind, two tendencies which it cannot lose without ceasing to exist, namely the need to comprehend, and we comprehend only the limited, and the…

=== p.32
DA: …er optagen af. Hvor der raader Lighed, gaas der let og, i hvert Tilfælde tilsyneladende, kontinuerlig over fra ‖32‖ det ene Emne til det andet. Lighed og Forskel er et Begrebspar, der frembyder Analogi med…
EN: … be that no great differences in time, place, intensity, magnitude or quality assert themselves between the objects with which consciousness is occupied. Where likeness prevails, one passes easily and, at any rate apparently, continuously from the one object to the other. Likeness and difference are a pair of concepts exhibiting an analogy with the pair continuity and discontinuity. But while it can be said of continuity that it is not noticed until it is past, likeness has a somewhat more conscious character. It d…

=== p.33
DA: …alderens Tænkning, der overvejende var klassifikatorisk og syllogistisk, var Spørgsmaalet om, hvilket af disse ‖33‖ Begreber der skulde anvendes i det enkelte Tilfælde, og med hvilken Ret det anvendtes, af…
EN: … form a progressive series as regards differences, thus from the abstract or general to the concrete or special. For the thinking of the Middle Ages, which was predominantly classificatory and syllogistic, the question which of these concepts was to be applied in the individual case, and with what right it was applied, was of the greatest significance. More recent science here undertakes a great reduction. For it, it is not the relation between higher and lower concepts that is decisive, but everything comes down t…

=== p.34
DA: …at danne Rækker af Emner, der ordnes efter tiltagende Ligheder eller aftagende Forskelligheder. Dets Dannelse ‖34‖ muliggør Synspunkter, ud fra hvilke der ikke blot kan vindes Oversigt over Relationernes V…
EN: …The concept of identity is formed as a natural continuation of the tendency which practical thinking already has to form series of objects ordered according to increasing likenesses or decreasing differences. Its formation makes possible points of view from which not merely an overview of the world of relations can be won, but by whose help the one relation may perhaps be derived from the other. Only at this point do the epistemological and the psychological-historical ways of consi…

=== p.35
DA: …dsætninger. Der er maaske end ikke en eneste Egenskab af dem, Begrebet angiver som fælles , der forekommer paa ‖35‖ aldeles ens Maade i de enkelte Emner, der eksemplificerer Begrebet. Men der raader dog en…
EN: …e individual objects do not thereby fall away, but can, precisely by being united under the same point of view, come forward as sharp oppositions. There is perhaps not even a single one of those properties which the concept states to be ``common'' that occurs in quite the same way in the individual objects exemplifying the concept. But an analogy nonetheless prevails between the various objects, in that the relation between their properties is throughout the same.…

=== p.36
DA: …er, og nu tilsidst nedlægger Arbejdet. Og selv i dette sidste Tilfælde kan det aldrig med Sikkerhed hævdes, at ‖36‖ vi staar overfor en kaotisk Forskelsrække. Det er strengt taget ikke berettiget at sige an…
EN: …ess when it is overwhelmed by the differences, and the chaos that is posited by a thought which in serious labour has searched for analogies and identities, and now at last lays down the work. And even in this latter case it can never be maintained with certainty that we stand before a chaotic series of difference. Strictly speaking it is not justifiable to say anything more than that it has hitherto not proved possible to find points of view of unity for the objects that seem to form such series. Just as identity …

=== p.37
DA: …g Erkendelse. Den ene af disse Grænser vilde betegne Erkendelsens Umulighed, den anden dens Afslutning. Mellem ‖37‖ begge ligger en Skala af Tankerækker (af hvilke nogle af de vigtigste er fremstillede i De…
EN: …ence as well as the absolute series of identity denote two ideal boundary lines for knowledge, boundary lines which can never be demonstrated in actual knowledge. The one of these boundaries would denote the impossibility of knowledge, the other its conclusion. Between the two lies a scale of series of thought (some of the most important of which are presented in ``Den menneskelige Tanke'' p. 162—174), denoting different stages by which knowledge works its way towards its ideal. —…

=== p.38
DA: …1 + 1 + 1 . . . En Forudsætning som denne sidste kender den rene Logik ikke. For den har Gentagelse af et Emne ‖38‖ ingen tankemæssig Betydning, saa megen psykologisk eller pædagogisk Betydning saadan Genta…
EN: …so the presupposition that out of these units he can form a series arising by unit being added to unit in always the same way, thus 1 + 1 + 1 . . . A presupposition such as this last is unknown to pure logic. For it, repetition of an object has no significance for thought, however much psychological or pedagogical significance such repetition may have. It holds to the principle of identity (and the logical principles more or less directly connected with it). The fundamental mathematical presupposition is, on the ot…

=== p.39
DA: …kkene eller sker paa de forskellige Steder, hvad der tælles eller grademaales, er nu ligegyldigt. Hvert enkelt ‖39‖ Led i Rækken betragtes, som om det havde samme Indhold som de andre, saa at kun Pladsen gø…
EN: …ed by its place in the series, a place itself determined by the relation to the other terms. What fills the moments or happens at the different places, what is counted or measured in degrees, is now indifferent. Each single term in the series is regarded as though it had the same content as the others, so that only the place makes a difference. In brief outline I have described this process of purging in ``Den menneskelige Tanke'' (p. 186—201), and I shall not go more closely into it here. I shall only add that the…

=== p.40
DA: …ngsprocesser tilvejebragt Mulighed for en Dannelse af Tankerækker, der kan fortsættes efter samme Princip, som ‖40‖ ligger til Grund for dens Dannelse, og ud fra hvilke der kan stilles Krav til de Emner, Ia…
EN: …ch concern concrete objects, can be developed only with constant regard to and borrowing from observation, there has through the named processes of purging been provided the possibility of forming series of thought which can be continued according to the same principle that lies at the basis of their formation, and from which demands can be made of the objects observation exhibits.…

=== p.41
DA: …else af Gyldigheden (salva veritate) kan sættes i Stedet for hinanden overalt. Ved at lade det komme an paa Mu ‖41‖ ligheden af Substitution i alle Tilfælde benytter man tydelig nok netop Relationen mellem…
EN: …articularly strong when one employs Leibniz's experimental definition: identical are those thoughts or objects which without cancellation of validity (salva veritate) can everywhere be put in the place of one another. By making everything depend on the possibility of substitution in all cases, one plainly enough employs precisely the relation between the thoughts (objects) in question and others; validity is preserved only if such relation is not altered when the substitution takes place. Even with the identity 1 =…

=== p.42
DA: …kellige Naturkræfter bestemmes som Energier, d. v. s. maales ved Evnen til at udføre et Arbejde, er derved til ‖42‖ vejebragt et Enhedssynspunkt, ligesom naar ellers højst forskellige Ting betragtes ene og…
EN: … attained through purging, that is, by disregarding points of view that do not concern the matter under discussion. When the various forces of nature are determined as energies, that is, measured by the capacity to perform work, there is thereby provided a point of view of unity, just as when otherwise highly different things are considered solely and alone under the point of view of weight. Right up to the appearance of spectral analysis one regarded, in accordance with Newton's physics, the globes in space essent…

=== p.43
DA: …at den Kendsgerning, at der gives saadanne Synspunkter, ved hvilke den strengeste Erkendelse, Mennesker kan op ‖43‖ naa, er mulig, nødvendigvis maa blive af stor Betydning for en sidste, afrundende Verdensa…
EN: …re for us the true world of Ideas; and it is a consideration which epistemology contributes to the discussion of the problem of existence (the cosmological problem), that the fact that there are such points of view, by which the strictest knowledge men can attain is possible, must necessarily become of great significance for a final, rounding-off world-view. —…

=== p.44
DA: …rmere Paavisning. For Stedets (Rummets) Vedkommende vil en anden, speciellere Sammenhæng give Anledning til at ‖44‖ komme tilbage til Spørgsmaalet. Af Interesse er dog netop her Poincaré's Bemærkning, at Ru…
EN: … in which alone they have their individuality. — What holds of moments and numbers holds analogously of degrees and places. This needs no closer demonstration in this connexion. As regards place (space), another, more special connexion will give occasion to return to the question. Of interest, however, precisely here is Poincaré's remark that the relativity of space and its uniformity are one and the same thing. —…

=== p.45
DA: …vi til at formode tilsvarende Forhold indenfor et andet Emne. Jo flere Eksempler vi herved har at gaa ud fra, ‖45‖ des mere nærmer Analogislutningen sig til Induktion. Men den faar stedse kun (ligesom iøvr…
EN: …ference from analogy. Aristotle has aptly called it inference from an example. From the relations within one object we are led to surmise corresponding relations within another object. The more examples we hereby have to proceed from, the more does the inference from analogy approach induction. But it always acquires (like induction, for that matter) significance only as a method of discovery, that is, as an occasion for setting up propositions which can thereafter be more closely tested; it can never become proof.…

=== p.46
DA: …res faktiske Udspring i den Trang til Orientering i Tilværelsen, som er en Livsbetingelse for Dyr og for Menne ‖46‖ sker. Tankens Udvikling af Tvivlen viser sig her slaaende. Naar Skuffelse, Modstand eller…
EN: …ter. The development of science out of practical life and sound common sense appears strikingly here. The real categories, particularly the concept of cause, have their actual origin in that need for orientation in existence which is a condition of life for animals and for men. The development of thought out of doubt shows itself strikingly here. When disappointment, resistance or contradiction puts an end to the involuntary trust in all emerging sensations and presentations, there is no other way to go than to see…

=== p.47
DA: …Passerben ved Virkelighedserkendelse. Nødes man til at staa paa det ene, uden at kunne finde sikker Plads til ‖47‖ det andet, er man i en Tilstand af Tvivl, Forventning eller Længsel.…
EN: …about the reality to which one has hitherto held, then the first compass-leg too must be moved, and so on. There will constantly be use for both compass-legs in the knowledge of reality. If one is forced to stand on the one without being able to find a secure place for the other, one is in a state of doubt, expectation or longing.…

=== p.48
DA: …mange Omraader under Undersøgelsens Gang mere og mere giver Plads for et Kontinuitetsforhold mellem de Emner, ‖48‖ der staar i Kausalitetsforhold til hverandre, og dette igen maaske for et Rationalitetsfor…
EN: …causality and for the concept of reality. And the history of science shows how the external relation between cause and effect in many domains gives place, in the course of investigation, more and more to a relation of continuity between the objects standing in causal relation to one another, and this again perhaps to a relation of rationality, in that later terms in the series of events can be derived from the law of the sequence of the preceding terms.…

=== p.49
DA: …nde nye Relationer og søge at bringe dem i Sammenhæng med tidligere fundne Relationer, maaske bruge dem til Be ‖49‖ rigtigelse af disse. Uden her at komme ind paa, hvad der hører under det kosmologiske Prob…
EN: …The solution can, and in this Bradley remains right, never be fully attained. But the work of knowledge constantly aims at finding new relations and seeking to bring them into connexion with relations found earlier, perhaps using them to correct the latter. Without here entering upon what belongs under the cosmological problem, it must be maintained that the work of knowledge is itself a reality, a member of the great reality which is perhaps far more comprehensive than what any work of…

=== p.50
DA: …idenskaber hver paa sit Omraade arbejder. Han har klart set Relationsbegrebets Betydning som Grundlag og Maale ‖50‖ stok for al Søgen efter Sandhed. Men hans eget System er i Grunden et krystalliseret Sandh…
EN: … are thereby excluded. And with this it again hangs together that he misjudges the significance of the relations with which the special sciences each work in their own domain. He has clearly seen the significance of the concept of relation as basis and measure for all search after truth. But his own system is at bottom a crystallized ideal of truth, an attempt to think experience as complete (experience entire, containing all elements in harmony, p. 172), — an attempt which cannot possibly be carried through, preci…

=== p.51
DA: …liteter i snevrere Forstand, men endnu anerkendte Tiden som objektiv Form, idet den saa Bevægelse i Rummet som ‖51‖ det Eneste, der eksisterede, skønt det blev forfalsket ved Menneskenes subjektive Opfattel…
EN: …jective objects about which strict science does not trouble itself. One here goes a step further than the mechanical conception of nature, which also disregarded qualities in the narrower sense, but still acknowledged time as an objective form, in that it saw motion in space as the only thing that existed, although it was ``falsified'' by men's subjective apprehension. It is a significant and paradoxical step that is taken further when one assumes that time can be reversed, so that the sequence of events is at last…

=== p.52
DA: …rved, at der til det rent tidløse, logisk-matematiske Forhold mellem Ligningernes Led svarer den tidslige Over ‖52‖ gang mellem kvalitativt forskellige Emner i vor Oplevelse. Det er gennem Analogi, at den l…
EN: …t in spite of everything, that strictly mathematical conclusion of the knowledge of nature has its great significance in this, that to the purely timeless, logical-mathematical relation between the terms of the equations there corresponds the temporal transition between qualitatively different objects in our experience. It is through analogy that logical-mathematical knowledge acquires its inestimable significance. In the equations the expert can read off the course of the phenomena, just as the musician can read o…

=== p.53
DA: …mile Meyerson har i sine erkendelsesteoretiske Værker lagt meget stor Vægt paa Forskellen mellem Erkendelse af ‖53‖ et lovmæssigt Forhold mellem Emner og en rationel Forklaring af et saadant Forhold. Især i…
EN: …Émile Meyerson has in his epistemological works laid very great weight on the difference between knowledge of a lawful relation between objects and a rational explanation of such a relation. Especially in the recently published great and penetrating work ``De l'Explication dans les Sciences'' (1921) he seeks to illuminate this difference through a wealth of examples from …

=== p.54
DA: …søger at finde en sammenhængende Proces, der begynder med Lysets Indvirkning, som er en vis Art af Bevægelse, ‖54‖ og fortsættes gennem de Bevægelser, som denne Indvirkning fremkalder i Molekulernes Indre,…
EN: …emonstrating a lawful relation between certain optical phenomena and the chemical structure of a substance, but that one seeks to find a connected process beginning with the action of light, which is a certain kind of motion, and continuing through the motions which this action calls forth in the interior of the molecules, and which again call forth certain motions in the sense organs affected by the substance in question. It is according to this scheme a continuous series of motions that is sought to be establishe…

=== p.55
DA: …vore forskellige Begrebers Kontinuitet og Ensartethed . En anden Sag er det, at han ikke mente, at der var Ud ‖55‖ sigt til Virkeliggørelse af dette Ideal, dels fordi de faktiske Diskontinuiteter forekom h…
EN: …explanation and foresight, and that it ``by its systematic speculations meets our understanding's involuntary need for unity by carrying through the continuity and uniformity of our various concepts''. It is another matter that he did not think there was any prospect of realizing this ideal, partly because the actual discontinuities seemed to him insuperable, partly because he wished to be a founder of religion and to make the results of the science won hitherto (i.e. up to 1830) the dogmas of the new religion. The…

=== p.56
DA: …paa finder Tanken nye Totaliteter, hvor der forhen kun syntes at foreligge sporadiske Iagttagelser. Men enhver ‖56‖ saadan Totalitet staar i Forhold til Emner og Elementer udenfor sig, og der stilles derfor…
EN: … For the rational points of view that have been found must be connected with one another and are thereby placed in definite relations to one another, and through the work on this thought finds new totalities where formerly there seemed to be only sporadic observations. But every such totality stands in relation to objects and elements outside itself, and therefore — in virtue of the concept of relation — ever new tasks are set. When, on the other hand, given objects immediately appear as wholes, the task becomes no…

=== p.57
DA: …Karneades har faaet Ret. Vi kender kun Virkeligheden ‖57‖ gennem de faste og mere eller mindre gennemskuelige Relationer mellem de Emner, Iagttagels…
EN: …Carneades has proved right. We know reality only through the fixed and more or less transparent relations between the objects observation exhibits. The progress of modern science in relation to the old Academics and Sceptics rests on the exactness with which the individual relations are determined, on the increasing…

=== p.58
DA: …‖58‖ Relationen Subjekt—Objekt. α. Indledning. De hidtil omtalte Relationer bestaar mellem Emne…
EN: …The Relation Subject—Object α. Introduction. The relations hitherto discussed subsist between objects among themselves and express from various sides the fact that human thought works by setting one object in relation to other objects and in that way finds the understanding it can win. The point is at last to lead all objects back to certain fundamental objects which for the time being stand fixed, even if a later age's inquiry may seek to reach …

=== p.59
DA: …gde og Energibestaaen som Grundkendsgerninger. Den stiller sig i hvert Tilfælde den Opgave at føre dem tilbage ‖59‖ til andre Kendsgerninger. — I Filosofien har man ofte villet slaa sig til Ro ved et vist A…
EN: …it is through the history of science that we can come to understand why at a given time one had to stop precisely at certain definite facts and find full explanation by leading other facts back to them. Mach has in the statement cited foretold what has really happened. In the twentieth century natural science no longer regards inertia, weight and the persistence of energy as fundamental facts. It at any rate sets itself the task of leading them back to other facts. — In philosophy one has often wished to rest content with a certain number of fundamental concepts (categories), and even Kant thought he had here reached the end. But it shows itself that the fundamental concepts knowledge employs in its work are as little the same at all times as natural science's fundamental facts, even though they do exhibit a certain persistent type through the ages.…

=== p.60
DA: …aal uundgaaelig komme frem, hvorledes man ud fra den Ontologi, man er naaet til, tilbagegaaende kan udlede den ‖60‖ Verden af Kvaliteter og Successioner, fra hvilken man steg op til, hvad man mente at have…
EN: …in itself''; that is no foreign question lying outside science itself, as the history of science sufficiently testifies. And in the third place the question must inevitably come forward how, from the ontology one has reached, one can derive retrogressively the world of qualities and successions from which one climbed up to what one thought to have attained as the absolute order of things. This question has the same justification now as it had in antiquity towards Plato and Democritus. —…

=== p.61
DA: …er Fremstilling af en Verdens Tilblivelse, ligefra den mosaiske Skabelseshistorie til moderne kosmogoniske For ‖61‖ søg, giver en Beskrivelse af, hvorledes det Hele vilde udfolde sig for en Tilskuer med vis…
EN: …hinker. The concepts subject and object are correlative, like synthesis and relation, continuity and discontinuity, likeness and difference, and so on. — Every presentation of a world's coming into being, from the Mosaic history of creation to modern cosmogonic attempts, gives a description of how the whole would unfold itself for a spectator with certain senses and certain presuppositions. The knowing subject, the spectator, the thinker, has himself a history determined by the experiences he has had and the way in…

=== p.62
DA: …gives noget rent Subjekt, som skulde kunne frembringe alt ud af sig selv. Der gives stedse kun et objektivt be ‖62‖ stemt S (et S o), ligesom der stedse kun gives et subjektivt bestemt O (et O s). At denne…
EN: …The weight laid on the relation subject—object leads by no means to subjectivism, since, as has been said, there is no pure subject that should be able to bring forth everything out of itself. There is always only an objectively determined S (an S o), just as there is always only a subjectively determined O (an O s). That this relation does not come to consciousness without further ado is a consequence of the involuntary trust with which we from the first meet every sensation, every me…

=== p.63
DA: …paa hvilke Kopernikus byggede sin Hypotese, var det subjektive Relationsbegreb. Sansning kan, siger han, ikke ‖63‖ umiddelbart sige os, hvad det er, der bevæger sig, — om det er den sansede Ting, eller det…
EN: …β. On Copernicanism. One of the grounds on which Copernicus built his hypothesis was the subjective concept of relation. Sensation cannot, he says, immediately tell us what it is that moves — whether it is the sensed thing, or the sensing subject, or perhaps both with different velocity or in different direction. If now the earth moved, the sensing subjects would move too, and there would be no ground for ascribin…

=== p.64
DA: …nostro de intendere). Vor Tanke arbejder stedse ved at bestemme et Emne ved et andet, ved at sætte Grænser og ‖64‖ ophæve Grænser — i Kraft af et og samme Princip. Saaledes bestemmes det ene Sted i Forhold…
EN: …nce of this way of seeing, and of Giordano Bruno, who like Cusanus derives the concept of relation from the nature of our knowledge (del modo nostro de intendere). Our thought constantly works by determining one object by another, by setting limits and cancelling limits — in virtue of one and the same principle. Thus the one place is determined in relation to the other, and motion in relation to a presupposed fixed point. If I seek such a point on the sun, a motion will look otherwise than when I seek it on the ear…

=== p.65
DA: …lværelsen og vor Opfattelse ikke: her har menneskelig Erkendelse Del i den Nødvendighed, med hvilken Guddommen ‖65‖ tænker de Sandheder, der bærer Tilværelsens Sammenhæng; kun den Forskel bliver tilbage, at…
EN: …een divine and human thought falls away for Galileo. It is his studies of Plato that are at work when he assumes that in mathematics the difference between existence itself and our apprehension does not hold: here human knowledge shares in the necessity with which the Deity thinks the truths that bear the connexion of existence; only this difference remains, that what men must laboriously and successively work to understand comes forward for the Deity in immediate intuition, and that the compass of divine knowledge…

=== p.66
DA: …Paa Grund af Sætningen om Bevægelsens Relativitet kunde rent formelt (matematisk) Himmelfænomenerne lige ‖66‖ saa godt forklares ved, at Solen gik rundt om Jorden, som ved, at Jorden gik rundt om Sole…
EN: …On account of the proposition of the relativity of motion, the celestial phenomena could purely formally (mathematically) be explained just as well by the sun going round the earth as by the earth going round the sun. And Tycho Brahe had set up an intermediate form between the two hypotheses, according to which the earth stood fixed while the sun and the planets went r…

=== p.67
DA: …e og absolut Bevægelse. Det er ved videnskabelig Orientering i Verden (in rebus philosophicis), at vi benytter ‖67‖ os af de absolute Steder (loca primaria), og det er da det matematiske Rum, der ligger til…
EN: …xhibits only relative motion, and absolute space, which stands in no external relation whatever, and which permits absolute determination of place and absolute motion. It is in scientific orientation in the world (in rebus philosophicis) that we make use of the absolute places (loca primaria), and it is then mathematical space that lies at the basis. In practical life (in rebus humanis), on the other hand, we content ourselves with sensuous space, which makes no absolute determination possible. This conception, whi…

=== p.68
DA: …Berkeley's Hovedtanke var, at vi tænker og maa tænke ‖68‖ i Eksempler. Almindelige Begreber, Sætninger og Love kender vi kun fra de specielle Tilfæl…
EN: …Berkeley's principal thought was that we think and must think in examples. General concepts, propositions and laws we know only from the special cases in which they display themselves, and it is unjustifiable to ascribe to them and to the relations they express existence as a world of their own behind the world …

=== p.69
DA: …sich til Forklaring af, at der eksisterer for os noget, som vi ikke selv har frembragt. Blandt Relationerne er ‖69‖ det for ham, ligesom for Berkeley, Relationen Subjekt—Objekt, der optager Interessen, og h…
EN: …ned, seen that relation is a fundamental concept holding for all knowledge, only that he, with decided inconsistency, reserved a relationless ``Ding an sich'' to explain that there exists for us something we have not ourselves brought forth. Among the relations it is for him, as for Berkeley, the relation subject—object that occupies the interest, and he maintains the fundamental position of the subject in this relation. Even in pure mathematics and exact empirical science a knowing subject is presupposed. Only for…

=== p.70
DA: …ler konstruere Skemaer. Overhovedet mener Kant ved Former Maader, paa hvilke den forbindende Funktion, den Syn ‖70‖ tese, hvori al Bevidsthed og al Erkendelse bestaar, foregaar i de enkelte Tilfælde. Vi kon…
EN: …he does not mean by intuition a result finished once for all, but a function, an intuiting, which leads to the forming of intuitive images or the construction of schemata. On the whole Kant means by ``forms'' ways in which the connecting function, the synthesis in which all consciousness and all knowledge consists, takes place in the individual cases. We construct space by adding point to point, piece to piece according to a definite rule. It is in the identity of such a rule that the unity of consciousness express…

=== p.71
DA: …Tanke, der fører Kant bort fra hans absolute Anskuelsesform. Rummet bliver en Ide i Kants Betydning, et Grænse ‖71‖ begreb, der afviser Afslutning og hævder Muligheden af fortsat Rækkedannelse. Rummets Begr…
EN: …o given space is conclusive. New spaces can always be imagined. It is the very thought of relation, of relation-setting, that leads Kant away from his absolute form of intuition. Space becomes an ``Idea'' in Kant's sense, a boundary concept which rejects conclusion and maintains the possibility of continued formation of series. The concept of space acquires only regulative significance, like the ``Ideas'' set up by Kant himself, and at bottom it belongs under ``the cosmological Idea'' (the concept world).…

=== p.72
DA: …‖72‖ δ. Den nye Relativitetsteori. Trods den store Udvidelse af Horizonten, som Kopernikanismen…
EN: …δ. The New Theory of Relativity Despite the great expansion of the horizon that Copernicanism gave impetus to, natural science had held fast to the concepts of absolute place and absolute motion, which had their justification only within the old worldview with its bounded and fixed frame. Galileo's and Newton's absolute space replaced the space bounded by the eighth sphere. But there came a time when the concept of relation here too made its cons…

=== p.73
DA: …ver klar over, at i og for sig kan ethvert Legeme i Verden bruges som Udgangspunkt, og at vi i Praksis i hvert ‖73‖ enkelt Tilfælde benytter et eller andet Legeme som forudsat fast Udgangspunkt for de Koord…
EN: … solution satisfying. He demanded that the concept of relation be carried through. The dogmatic conception of the law of inertia, in his view, only falls away when one becomes clear that in itself any body in the world can be used as a starting point, and that in practice in each individual case we use one body or another as the presupposed fixed starting point for the coordinates in relation to which the velocity and direction of a motion are determined. (Die Erhaltung der Arbeit, 1872). This is the path that has …

=== p.74
DA: …Fysik Lysets Hastighed, medens den for Aristoteles, og endnu for Kopernikanerne, hentedes fra Himmellegemernes ‖74‖ Bevægelser. (Bruno's Lære om Tidsbegrebets Relativitet hviler paa denne Maalestok. Se oven…
EN: …act that attention was paid only to velocities that were very small in relation to the velocity of light. The final temporal measure becomes, for modern physics, the velocity of light, whereas for Aristotle, and even for the Copernicans, it was drawn from the motions of celestial bodies. (Bruno's doctrine of the relativity of the concept of time rests on this measure. See above.) On the basis of the electromagnetic theory of physical phenomena, for which the mechanical conception of nature stands as only a special …

=== p.75
DA: …aavise Situationer, hvor det, der staar som Samtidighed for en Iagttager, staar for en anden Iagttager som suc ‖75‖ cessivt, maa Fysikere afgøre mellem hverandre indbyrdes. Hvis det maa besvares med Ja, sta…
EN: …nother. In such a dispute the philosopher as such cannot intervene, and philosophy has time to wait. Whether physics can really demonstrate situations in which what stands as simultaneity for one observer stands for another observer as successive, physicists must determine among themselves. If this must be answered with yes, we stand before the significant result that natural science has once again, as with the Copernican hypothesis, by its own path come to see the necessity of not merely holding to the content of …

=== p.76
DA: …r Tiden, som han under sine Betingelser maa. Men hvis en Iagttager tillige er Fysiker, vil han (Rigtigheden af ‖76‖ Einsteins Teori stadig forudsat) kunne forklare os, hvorfor en anden Iagttager faar en and…
EN: …that different observers under certain determinate conditions arrive at different apprehensions of time. Each individual observer apprehends time as he must under his conditions. But if an observer is also a physicist, he will (assuming the correctness of Einstein's theory) be able to explain to us why another observer arrives at a different apprehension than he himself does. (Cf. Newton's and Leibniz's emphasis on the lawfulness of motion as the expression of its objectivity. Above, p. 66.) Naturally, the physical…

=== p.77
DA: …Campanella sagde i sin Apologi for Galilei, at hvis ‖77‖ Galilei havde Ret, maatte man filosofere paa en ny Maade. Men hvis Einstein har Ret, behøv…
EN: …Campanella said in his apology for Galileo that if Galileo were right, one would have to philosophize in a new way. But if Einstein is right, one need not therefore philosophize in a new way. Even from a purely philosophical point of view, as the foregoing presentation has shown, attention was long since drawn to…

=== p.78
DA: …træder i Modsætning til Platon. Den Vanskelighed, som herved opstaar, og som paa en glimrende Maade er belyst ‖78‖ af Zeller (Die Philosophie der Griechen, II, 2), kan kun overvindes gennem en nærmere Drøf…
EN: …s such, could be an object of science. This hangs together with the logical-schematic character of his philosophy. Science was for him, as for Plato, subordination of the particular and individual under general concepts. But now for Aristotle everything real was at the same time particular and individual; it is on this point that he comes into opposition to Plato. The difficulty arising hereby, and which has been brilliantly illuminated by Zeller (Die Philosophie der Griechen, II, 2), can be overcome only through a closer discussion of what one understands, and scientifically must understand, by reality; and such a discussion was, as we have seen, introduced with great energy by the Academics and Sceptics of antiquity. Already here the thought came forward that the criterion of reality can consist only in the fixed connexion between observations. Just as the formal sciences spring from a…

=== p.79
DA: …ioner, der er dens Emner, undersøger den i Forhold til de Omstændigheder, under hvilke de foreligger, og hvert ‖79‖ enkelt af hine Emner undersøger den med Hensyn til dets indre Sammenhæng. I begge Henseend…
EN: …Historical research now aims precisely at both kinds of connexion. The events, personalities or institutions that are its objects it investigates in relation to the circumstances under which they are present, and each single one of those objects it investigates with regard to its inner connexion. In both respects a beginning is made with criticism of reports, but this criticism itself lays the named criterion of reality at the basis. Thereafter it becomes the task to find the bond c…

=== p.80
DA: …Nu staar der i Historien som i Naturen en Kamp for Tilværelsen. Historikeren staar overfor Begivenheder og ‖80‖ Personligheder i den menneskelige Verden, som Biologen staar overfor Planter og Dyr i dere…
EN: …Now there stands in history as in nature a struggle for existence. The historian stands before events and personalities in the human world as the biologist stands before plants and animals in their struggle for existence. The point in both cases is to understand the contending parties each for itself, as regards their nature and their conditions, and thereby to un…

=== p.81
DA: …af Ligegyldighed overfor alle stridende Parter, men fordi han var universel og kunde sætte sig ind i og følge ‖81‖ det Liv, der rørte sig hos enhver af dem. Denne historiske Universalitet er beslægtet med…
EN: …rstand the tension and the strife between nations. It has been said of Leopold Ranke that when in his historical inquiry he avoided one-sided partisanship, it was not because he was neutral, in the sense of indifference towards all contending parties, but because he was universal and could enter into and follow the life stirring in each of them. This historical universality is akin to the artistic universality that enabled Shakespeare to let each of his figures unfold according to their own inner laws. His impartia…

=== p.82
DA: …sig frem hos Historikeren, naar han prøver at give sin Fremstilling den sidste Afrunding, vil han staa overfor ‖82‖ de principielle Vanskeligheder, der frembyder sig ved ethvert Forsøg paa at begrunde etisk…
EN: …If nevertheless the ethical standpoint of value involuntarily forces itself forward in the historian when he tries to give his presentation its final rounding-off, he will stand before the difficulties of principle presenting themselves in every attempt to ground ethical judgments, thus in every ethics.…

=== p.83
DA: …Kirke) eller et Indbegreb af Bestræbelser (Kunst, Videnskab o. s. v.). En Vurdering vil tilsidst være bestemt ‖83‖ ved en Handlings Forhold til Betingelserne for en saadan Helheds Bestaaen og Udvikling. Ku…
EN: …termines the valuation. Such a whole may be the valuing personality itself, or a society (family, estate, state, church), or a sum of endeavours (art, science and so on). A valuation will at last be determined by an action's relation to the conditions of such a whole's subsistence and development. Only when a whole given in experience is presupposed, whose conditions of existence and development can be discussed, is a rational valuation, and thus a rational ethics, possible. Ethical idealism often works against its…

=== p.84
DA: …agter da det andet Passerbens Stilling som absolut given, selvfølgelig eller objektiv . Ikke mindst fremtræder ‖84‖ dette hos Etikere, der mener at have sikret sig et objektivt Stade ved at gaa ud fra Samfu…
EN: … lack of consciousness of where the one compass-leg stands which so often leads to a misjudging of the significance of the concept of relation. One then regards the position of the other compass-leg as absolutely given, self-evident or ``objective''. Not least does this appear in moralists who think they have secured themselves an ``objective'' standpoint by proceeding from ``society'' (without even saying what society they mean). Or it is, as in Kant, the concept norm that one lays at the basis. Kant, who in his e…

=== p.85
DA: …rstaa de Opfattelser, som de forskellige Grundlag (Grundværdier) gør mulig, og som kan komme i afgørende Strid ‖85‖ med hverandre. Derved forstaas den Kendsgerning, at samme Handling, samme Personlighed, sa…
EN: …The comparative moralist now has (as in their domains the physicist and the historian have) the task of understanding the conceptions which the various foundations (fundamental values) make possible, and which may come into decisive conflict with one another. Thereby is understood the fact that the same action, the same personality, the same institution can be the object of conflicting ethical judgments. On account of the lawful connexion which can be demonstrated by psychological an…

=== p.86
DA: …Grundværdi, og hvad han ud fra dette Grundlag føres til at lære, har ofte ført til uretfærdige Domme om etiske ‖86‖ Tænkere. Saaledes har man ment, at den Vægt, Filosofer som Adam Smith, Helvetius og Bentha…
EN: …Misjudgment of the relation between what is a moralist's fundamental value and what he is from this foundation led to teach has often led to unjust judgments about ethical thinkers. Thus it has been thought that the weight which philosophers like Adam Smith, Helvetius and Bentham have laid on the acquisitive impulse, on individual interest and on the impulse to happiness, must be due exclusively to a preoccupation with individual or…

=== p.87
DA: …aa paa det etiske Omraade kan Sandheden kun arbejde sig frem gennem Strid. Psykologien og Historien har saa at ‖87‖ sørge for, at der bag den brændende Strid kan være en underjordisk Forstaaelse.…
EN: … is good that in a society different, even conflicting, ethical conceptions should be asserted, even though he can of course follow only his own. In the ethical domain too, truth can work its way forward only through strife. Psychology and history have then to see to it that behind the burning strife there can be an underground understanding.…

=== p.88
DA: …Karakter, og Specialiseringen kan kun grundes paa de historiske Betingelser, under hvilke de skal gennemføres. ‖88‖ Abstraktioner og vage Drømme er ikke nok. Det gælder foreløbig om, at Retningen for Karakt…
EN: … such as the one I have attempted to give in my Ethics (X, 4), shows this. As regards the social arrangements, it is seen from the history of marriage (Etik XV) and of the social question (Etik XXV). The old leather bottles cannot at once be replaced with new ones. Besides, ethical norms always have a general character, and the specialization can be grounded only on the historical conditions under which they are to be carried through. Abstractions and vague dreams are not enough. The point is for the time being that the direction for the development of character and the ordering of society should be determined by the fundamental value. A complete programme only experience can lead one to work out. It goes with ethical norms as it goes with the concept of cause in epistemology, which likewise does not in itself show any solution of special questions, but merely motivates an asking and a s…

=== p.89
DA: …lært og intet glemt. Naar den, der er opfyldt af et Ideal, tillige besidder intellektuel Redelighed, vil han, ‖89‖ for Idealets egen Skyld, undersøge alle Forhold, under hvilke det skal virke, og alle Maad…
EN: …epresented in Europe as hatred of the new and hope of being able in spite of everything to preserve the old. Of both opposites it holds that they have learned nothing and forgotten nothing. When he who is filled with an ideal also possesses intellectual honesty, he will, for the ideal's own sake, investigate all the conditions under which it is to work, and all the ways in which this working must intervene in human affairs.…

=== p.90
DA: …d. Man kan jo dog styre efter Stjernerne, skønt de har en Historie. Og desuden foregaar den etiske Sejlads paa ‖90‖ de jordiske Have og betinges derfor ikke blot ved Stjernerne, men ved Vind og Vove.…
EN: …ertain stage of this process of development. (See Etik III, 13; 21). This does not deprive ethical ideas of their significance or their validity. One can after all steer by the stars, although they have a history. And besides, the ethical voyage takes place on earthly seas and is therefore conditioned not merely by the stars, but by wind and wave.…

=== p.91
DA: …e og ydre Modstand overvindes, og er denne Modstand forskellig for forskellige Individers Vedkommende, kan det ‖91‖ virkelig udførte Arbejde kun bestemmes ved Forholdet til denne forskellige Modstand. Hvad…
EN: …everyone. Of him who is capable of great or self-sacrificing activity there is demanded something other and more than of him who under inner discord or by reason of powerlessness of mind perhaps just manages to keep his head above water. Only then is the same ethical work in reality demanded of all; for ethical work is the expression of the energy with which inner and outer resistance is overcome, and if this resistance is different for different individuals, the work actually performed can be determined only by the relation to this different resistance. What is demanded of the individual may then lie now above, now below the average demands set by a general law. Everyone is, as Schiller's Wilhelm Tell says, taxed according to ability.…

=== p.92
DA: …Af de individuelle Relationers Betydning følger en vig ‖92‖ tig Konsekvens for social Etik. Det maa være en nødvendig Opgave at stræbe efter at skaffe…
EN: …From the significance of the individual relations there follows an important consequence for social ethics. It must be a necessary task to strive to provide all members of society with such possibilities of development that the choice of work can become free. So long as this is not attained, the ethical demand upon…

=== p.93
DA: …Men af dette i psykologisk, historisk og individuel Henseende Relationsløse følger igen, at vi i Grunden ingen ‖93‖ egentlige etiske Domme kan fælde. Naar vi ingen Adgang har til at forstaa Forholdet mellem…
EN: …But from this relationlessness in psychological, historical and individual respects it again follows that we can at bottom pass no properly ethical judgments. When we have no access to understanding the relation between norm, motive and action, we can never have the right to call any human action before us good or evil. This consequence Kant already drew in the first edit…

=== p.94
DA: …Kant og Droysen har dog ikke ganske Uret i deres Er ‖94‖ klæringer om, at Handlingers egentlige Moralitet ikke kan opdages eller begrundes. Thi vi…
EN: …Kant and Droysen are nonetheless not entirely wrong in their declarations that the proper morality of actions cannot be discovered or grounded. For we can never be sure that we have taken all relations into consideration. It is at last impossible to satisfy the demand which precisely in virtue of the concept of …

=== p.95
DA: …Virkeligheden frembyder baade Værdi og det Modsatte. Den Modsætning, her foreligger, behøver — efter min Opfat ‖95‖ telse — ikke at være en Dualisme, som man har ment; men den kan ganske vist stige til en K…
EN: …f Relation. The religious problem too, however one may stand towards it, exhibits a many-sided application of the concept of relation. This problem rests in all its forms on an opposition between the valuable on the one side, the valueless or value-hindering on the other, — more briefly expressed, between value and reality, in that reality exhibits both value and its opposite. The opposition here present need not — in my view — be a dualism, as has been thought; but it may certainly rise to a catastrophe, bring with it that tragedy of life the possibility of which no view of life can exclude, as little as one can exclude the possibility of earthquakes. And even if in the tragic, in the suffering that leads to the limit of the human, one would find the true nature of existence expressed, that would precisely confirm the significance of oppositions for the conception of life. The tragic pr…

=== p.96
DA: …nde; men atter og atter trænger Relation sig frem og stiller Problemet paany. Livets Trang forstyrrer Asketen, ‖96‖ og Virkelighedens Verden trænger sig ind i Mystikerens Celle med sin Mangfoldighed og sin…
EN: …ding concepts, God and world, and all religious thinking is a brooding over the relation between these two concepts. In asceticism and in mysticism one seeks, now more in practice, now more in speculation, to reach beyond all relations, or (as we have seen above p. 47 Note) at least to make the one term of the relation disappear; but again and again relation forces itself forward and sets the problem anew. The need of life disturbs the ascetic, and the world of reality forces its way into the mystic's cell with its manifoldness and its unrest. One discovers at last the position of the one compass-leg, however well it was hidden.…

=== p.97
DA: …n Modstand og derved virker til Udløsning af Kræfter, der ellers vilde ligge brak. En Betragtning af denne Art ‖97‖ førte Goethe (Aus meinem Leben. Fjerde Del) til at fremhæve, hvad han kaldte det Dæmoniske…
EN: …re complicated does the matter become when, as Böhme already recognized, it may be a condition for the development of the good that evil should exercise its resistance and thereby work towards the release of forces which would otherwise lie fallow. A consideration of this kind led Goethe (Aus meinem Leben. Fjerde Del) to emphasize what he called the demonic in the world, and to use the motto: nemo contra deum nisi deus ipse.…

=== p.98
DA: …en Værdi der er i Verden, eller af hvilken Art den er. Paa disse to Punkter ligger Forskellighederne mellem de ‖98‖ forskellige Religioner eller religiøse Standpunkter, som det her ikke er Stedet at gaa ind…
EN: …The expression ``the persistence of value'' says nothing about how much value there is in the world, or of what kind it is. On these two points lie the differences between the various religions or religious standpoints, which this is not the place to enter upon; that must be left to the history of religion and the psychology of religion. For the theory of relation it was here only the task to show that the concept of relation…

=== p.99
DA: …‖99‖ Relationsbegrebet i Kosmologien. Tilsteder Relationsbegrebets Gennemførelse en afrundet, o…
EN: …The Concept of Relation in Cosmology. Does the carrying through of the concept of relation permit a rounded, even if not concluded, conception of existence? Will not every conception of a whole here show itself impossible in face of a chaos of points of view, each of which lays claim to justification? — In face of such questions there are various considerations to bring forward.…

=== p.100
DA: …sig mere og mere til det matematiske Ideal af en Identiteternes eller Substitutionernes Verden, hvor Tids- og ‖100‖ Kvalitetsforskelligheder ikke spiller nogen Rolle, medens Aandsvidenskaben (eller, som nog…
EN: … then often maintains that here at last a choice must be made between two possibilities: between a mathematical-mechanical and a psychological-qualitative primal phenomenon. Natural science approaches more and more the mathematical ideal of a world of identities or substitutions, where differences of time and quality play no part, while the human sciences (or, as some prefer to call them, the sciences of culture) maintain the reality of differences of quality and stages of development which exclude reduction to ide…

=== p.101
DA: …drøfte de forskellige Synspunkter, der kan gøre sig gældende, navnlig ogsaa med Hensyn til, om deres indbyrdes ‖101‖ Forhold er kontradiktorisk eller blot kontrært. Selve de Grænser, menneskelig Erkendelse a…
EN: …it is. It was this fact that he projected outward as an absolute reality and called the substance in everything. And it is at any rate a foothold making it possible to discuss the various points of view that may assert themselves, particularly also with regard to whether their mutual relation is contradictory or merely contrary. The very limits to which human knowledge is always subject can be determined only by scientific thinking. And here it shows itself, as remarked several times in the foregoing, that the nece…

=== p.103
DA: …hvilken de forskellige individuelle Opfattelser kan forklares. Galilei har været inspireret af denne Tanke ved ‖103‖ Grundlæggelsen af sin Bevægelseslære. Men han kom i Forlegenhed ved, hvad hans ufuldkomne…
EN: … apprehend the same thing in different ways as regards magnitude and figure, one can by counting and measuring arrive at a conception from which the various individual conceptions can be explained. Galileo was inspired by this thought in the founding of his doctrine of motion. But he was embarrassed by what his imperfect telescope showed him of the phenomenon now called Saturn's ring. The phenomenon appeared now as edges or corners on the planet, now as two different subsidiary planets. At last Galileo gave up all …

=== p.104
DA: …aa anvendes mellem Emner indbyrdes, men ogsaa mellem Emnerne og det erkendende Subjekt, eller rettere udtrykt, ‖104‖ at det erkendende Subjekt selv er et Emne. Ogsaa the percipient event , for at bruge White…
EN: …Already above (p. 58 ff.) I have, in face of such a consideration, impressed that the concept of relation must be applied not merely between objects among themselves, but also between the objects and the knowing subject, or, more correctly expressed, that the knowing subject is itself an object. ``The percipient event'' too, to use Whitehead's expression, belongs among the events in the world. We have no right to assert in advance an absolute opposition between object and subject. Even…

=== p.105
DA: …ed i enhver ærlig Stræben efter Klarhed. Vi skaber ikke selv de Forudsætninger, ud fra hvilke vi tænker, og vi ‖105‖ bliver os dem end ikke fuldt bevidste. Der er her en Analogi mellem det intellektuelle og…
EN: …It is not an intellectually aristocratic train of thought to which we are hereby led. Precisely according to the concept of relation there is truth in every honest striving after clarity. We do not ourselves create the presuppositions from which we think, and we do not even become fully conscious of them. There is here an analogy between the intellectual and the ethical life (see above p. 81 ff.). In the necessity with which the ``imperfect'' presentations appear, eternal truth is itsel…

=== p.106
DA: …r og atter erfarer, hvorledes nye Relationer og dermed nye Spørgsmaal dukker op og kræver Bestemmelser. Vi har ‖106‖ derfor, som ovenfor vist, ingen Ret til at tro, at Tilværelsen er udtømt ved de to Urfænom…
EN: …ve that existence is more comprehensive than what our thought at any time or in any form can comprehend, this is grounded in our experiencing again and again how new relations and thereby new questions emerge and demand determinations. We have therefore, as shown above, no right to believe that existence is exhausted by the two primal phenomena or attributes which can briefly be denoted as mind and matter. It is the teasing thing about the concept of relation that it constantly shows us a hole in our systems. Even …

=== p.107
DA: …Modsætninger gør Modsætningen mellem det Værdifulde og det Værdihæmmende sig, praktisk set, stærkest gældende. ‖107‖ Kan der ikke vindes nogen begrundet Forvisning om, at alle Modsætninger og Hæmninger kan h…
EN: …ur most significant experiences, and these have labour, striving and struggle for their content, corresponding to the constant contention between our two most fundamental categories, synthesis and relation. Without the appearance of oppositions and striving to overcome them, existence cannot, philosophically seen, be thought. Among these oppositions the opposition between the valuable and the value-hindering asserts itself, practically seen, most strongly. If no grounded assurance can be won that all oppositions and inhibitions can be harmonized, the analogy with the working life of thought and will can nonetheless afford a poetic and symbolic expression for the assurance that the labour in which we are placed is not an isolated feature in reality; for that, relation and the struggle with relations hang far too closely together with the knowledge of existence which we are at all able to …

=== p.108
DA: …skildret, saaledes som den ofte føres i et higende Sind. Digteren er klar over — som Filosofen ogsaa kan være ‖108‖ det — at det Højeste bor længere inde i os, end vi selv kan trænge . Men han er ikke tilfr…
EN: …In Obstfelder's ``En Præsts Dagbog'' the struggle between thought and image is depicted in a profound and atmospheric way, as it is often waged in a yearning mind. The poet is clear — as the philosopher too can be — that the highest dwells ``further within us than we ourselves can penetrate''. But he is not satisfied with this conviction. He wishes to have it out before him, to ``come outside that which is within us'', to be able to say thou to it, to have an image of it. I…
